## 1

*Suggest, with reasons, types of insurance that the government of a country may require its citizens to hold. [5]*

## 2

*A general insurance company’s latest annual profits show that the company is performing in line with expectations overall. However, the performance of its home insurance product has been poor over the last 12 months, and it has suffered significant losses on this business.*

### 2-i

*Suggest possible reasons for the losses on the home insurance product. [4]*

*The regulator has reviewed the general insurance company’s reserves and has determined that they are not sufficient. The regulator has therefore instructed the insurance company to increase its reserves within one month of the date of the instruction.*

### 2-ii

*Outline the options available to the insurance company to increase its reserves.[3]*

## 3

*An investor, who wishes to invest in insurance companies, is about to undertake an analysis before selecting which companies to invest in.*

### 3-i

*Outline why the analysis of insurance companies will differ from the analysis of other financial services companies. [3]*

### 3-ii

*Explain what comparing the following ratios could indicate when analysing insurance companies: [4]*

- *Total of incurred claims and expenses to premium income*
- *Premium payments to reinsurance companies to gross premium income.*

## 4

*A life insurance company currently offers its with-profits policyholders the option of surrendering their policy early. On surrender, the policyholder is paid a surrender value, the amount of which is at the discretion of the company. Historically, surrender values paid in the early years of a policy have been significantly lower than the expected value of the policy at maturity, even after adjusting for future premiums and investment returns.*

### 4-i

*Outline the reasons why the life insurance company would take the approach outlined above to determine surrender values. [2]*

### 4-ii

*Suggest possible reasons why a policyholder would want to surrender the policy in the early years. [2]*

*Following complaints from surrendering policyholders, the insurance company plans to review its approach to determining surrender values.*

### 4-iii

*Suggest possible factors the insurance company should consider in its review. [4]*


## 5

*A pension scheme uses an algorithmic trading system for its investment in domestic equities.*

### 5-i

*Outline the potential risks associated with algorithmic trading for this pension scheme. [3]*

### 5-ii

*Discuss the professional and technical standards that may apply to actuaries giving advice to a pension scheme. [6]*

## 6

*A global insurance group has 20 different business units around the world, split as follows:*

- *ten life insurance companies selling term assurance and annuity products*
- *ten general insurance companies specialising in unique risks (eg insuring the President of the United States of America’s air travel).*

### 6-i

*Discuss how enterprise risk management could be used to decide how capital could be distributed between the group’s business units. [5]*

*One of the general insurance companies (Company X) in the group has been invited to quote for insuring the risk that the next four Olympic Games, which happen every 4 years, are delayed or cancelled.*

### 6-ii

*Outline how Company X would prioritise this opportunity relative to the other business units’ business plans. [5]*

## 7

*A defined benefit pension scheme in Country X has the following membership:*

- *100 pensioners in payment who are all over the age of 80, but are receiving pension payments of £100,000 pa, which increase in line with inflation*
- *1,000 pensioners in payment with an average age of 65, with an average pension of £5,000 pa*
- *1,000 deferred members who are due to retire in the next 5 years, with an average pension of £5,000 pa.*

*The government of Country X is known for regularly changing the regulations for pension schemes.*

### 7-i

*Outline the factors that create uncertainty around the pension benefits that will be paid by the pension scheme. [6]*

Regulation changes

*The pension scheme currently has a deficit of £50m, and the trustees are discussing a contribution plan with the sponsor of the scheme, to remove the deficit over a specified period.*

### 7-ii

*Describe the factors that may lead to uncertainty in the contributions required from the sponsor to remove the deficit. [6]*

Regulation changes

## 8

*A large benefit scheme invests in a wide range of assets. The current property portfolio held by the benefit scheme consists of direct investment in offices, shops and warehouses but not in residential property.*

### 8-i

*Discuss how the scheme managers could gain exposure to residential property, without making a direct investment. [4]*

Invest in property equities.

- Such as real estate investment trusts.
    - However this will also expose the scheme to equity market risk.
    - And likely higher volatility than other methods of investing in property.
    - Although likely lower fees than other property investment methods.
    - particularly if fund is passively managed.
- or buy equity of a single company exposed to property
    - such as a publically traded residential property development firm.
    - although this will not give as much diversification as an REIT.

A collective investment scheme.

- would allow the scheme to benefit from the CIS' expertise.
- although fees are likely higher than investing in REITs.
- but the property may be acquired cheaply
- if the CIS units are trading at lower than net asset value.
- a CIS may give a level of diversification between that of a single firm's equity and an REIT.

### 8-ii

*The scheme managers are proposing to directly invest in residential property. The proposal will involve buying the land, developing properties and then renting them to private tenants.*

*Explain why the scheme managers may wish to invest directly in residential property. [5]*

Greater control over

- cashflows of the investment
    - as the scheme managers would be more in control of rent levels
- voids
    - as the scheme managers would be more in control over who the properties are rented out to
- flexibility of future use
    - as the managers own the properties they can repurpose them as needed.
    - subject to eviction laws.

More targetted exposure to residential property

- properties can be developed in precisely the locations the scheme managers would like them
    - perhaps helping to manage catastrophe risk
    - and build in areas the managers believe will have less void risk due to affluence of the neighbourhood.

Scheme managers may feel using indirect investment does not remove the need for residential property expertise ...

... so they may as well develop that knowledge in house and retain it by making the investment decisions themselves ...

... rather than pay someone else to do so.

The scheme managers may not want to spend the fees of an indirect manager.

The scheme rules may have a fee cap ...

... and no residential property managers of sufficient quality can be found with low enough fees.

### 8-iii

*Discuss the risks involved with investing in this proposal. [6]*

PNEFCPB

#### Political

#### Natural

A natural disaster such as an earthquake may delay the building of the properties ...

... or render them unable to generate rents once they are built ...

... or even result in a liability the scheme needs to pay the tenants, depending on the rental agreement.

#### External

Competition for rents becomes more fierce and the scheme cannot charge sufficient rents to match their liabilities.

The scheme's regulator may ban direct investments by schemes ...

... or prevent them from taking on the role of property developer.

#### Financial

#### Credit

#### Project

The build is delayed e.g. due to non-catastrophic bad weather such as an usually wet winter.

#### Business

Voids higher than expected.

Rents lower than expected.

Management of the properties costs more than expected.

- sales and marketing
- fielding complaints and arranging maintenance.

Residential rents prove to be a poor match for the scheme's liabilities ...

... resulting in the level of overall risk being higher than expected.

## 9

*A football club has a defined benefit pension scheme for its employees. It has three different categories of employee who work for the club:*

- *Players – generally paid between £500,000 and £1,000,000 pa. At this particular club, they are very loyal and play for the club between the ages of 18 and 35, at which point they retire.*
- *One manager – the club has employed five managers over the last 60 years; the current manager is paid £250,000 pa.*
- *Staff – the remaining 100 staff members have worked for the club for an average of 30 years, with an average salary of £40,000 pa.*

### 9-i

*Outline the possible issues the football club would have considered in designing the benefits for each category of employee. [7]*

Providing for needs in retirement.

#### Players

Short time spent accruing pension / paying into the scheme.

Retiring young so long time to retirement ...

... can invest in riskier, more volatile assets to earn a higher expected return ...

... and an increased amount when they reach normal retirement age.

Potential need for income immediately after retirement ...

... optimising for tax laws around taking cash at a young age.

Enforced a high percentage of salary going in to pension ...

... to help protect young players not thinking about retirement ...

... and paying for themselves and their loved ones when they stop playing.

#### Manager

Ease of transferring pension in deferment.

#### Staff

Older than players ...

... so closer to retirement on average.

Within this group there will be a wide variety of income / age profiles.

For example, some junior team members will have a low salary and a long time to retirement.

While some of the directors of the club will have a comparatively high salary and a shorter time to retirement.

Flexible investment options to cover the wide range of employee profiles.

### 9-ii

*Explain why different mortality assumptions may need to be used for each category of employee. [5]*

Underestimating mortality could mean the contributions made to the scheme are not enough to cover benefits as they fall due.

Overestimating mortality could mean the contributions to the scheme are unecessarily large and the club could have used that capital for another purpose.

But, the three groups combined will be heterogeneous ...

... there will be different mortality among the members.

If the population can be divided into relatively homogeneous groups ...

... a price can be determined that applies to all risks in that group.

For the scheme this will include

## 9-iii

*Discuss how the scheme’s managers could control the different expenses associated with running the pension scheme. [5]*

Fixed / variable

Initial / renewal / investment / termination.

Invest in passive funds ...

... to reduce investment fees.

Monitoring the experience ...

... for adverse experience and inefficiencies.

Outsourcing scheme administration ...

... to benefit from economies of scale.

### 9-iv

*Suggest, with reasons, an appropriate investment strategy for the scheme. [7]*

It will be important to match the scheme's liabilities.

But also important to keep in mind the level and form of the scheme's assets.

For example, if the level of the scheme's liabilities exceeds the assets significantly ...

... the scheme will need to accept some mismatching risk to invest in more return-seeking assets.

### 9-v

*Explain the importance of monitoring the scheme's experience against the scheme's funding assumptions. [3]*

Monitoring can help in:

- updating assumptions
- updating methods ...
- ... to more closely reflect expected future experience.

Trends can be monitored ...

... particularly adverse trends ...

... so corrective action can be taken.

Monitoring provides information to management ...

... and other key stakeholders.
