
## 1.

### 1-i.

*List four key stakeholders in the risk governance of a life insurance company.*

- board of directors / managers
- employees
- Chief Risk Officer / risk managers
- shareholders
- actuaries (or other professional advisers)
- regulator / State
- policyholders
- credit rating agencies

### 1-ii.

*Describe how each of the stakeholders in part (i) could contribute to the risk governance of the company.*

#### Shareholders

Can raise any concerns about risk governance at shareholder meetings ...

... and use their voting rights to instigate change. 

#### Chief risk officer / Risk owners

The risk budget will be allocated between the different business units ...

... allowing for the benefits of any diversification of risk across the business.

Responsible for overseeing the data collected on risk and for risk monitoring, reporting and management. 

#### Employees

Will seek to identify risks.

Will seek to identify ways to control risks.

#### Regulator / State

Can require the insurer to hold sufficient capital, according to the insurer’s risk profile.

## 2.

### 2-i.

*Describe the Minimum Capital Requirement and the Solvency Capital Requirement under the Solvency II regime.*

The minimum captial requirement (MCR) is the threshold at which firms can no longer trade.

The solvency capital requirement (SCR) is the target level of capital below which firms need to discuss remedies with the regulator.

### 2-ii.

*Explain why an insurance company might use an internal model to assess its regulatory capital requirements.*

The main reason for using an internal model is likely to be to reduce capital requirements.

The cost of developing the internal model would need to have been weighed up against the reduction in capital from such a model ...

... and it may be that if the insurer is large then developing the internal model would have been worthwhile.

The alternative to using an internal model would be to use the regulator’s standard model / formula. 

The standard model will be based on an average insurer, so would not reflect:

- the risk profile of this particular insurer
- the business characteristics of this insurer.

If the capital requirement is lower ...

... then the insurer has more investment freedom.

The standard model may not include risks which are important to the insurer.

A long-established insurer may be able to set assumptions more appropriate for its business ...

... and could therefore remove the approximations used in the standard model

The internal model can be used for other purposes, eg:

- calculating economic capital
- exploring sensitivities and stresses beyond those in the standard model ...

    ... and it may be more efficient to use the same model for various purposes within the insurance company.

The company may have spent a lot of time ...

... and money developing the model which are now sunk costs.


## 3.

*Over the last five years in a particular country, the government has been reducing the amount of State healthcare it provides, while the population size has remained unchanged.*

*An insurance company operating in that country sells a variety of domestic products and is considering the implications of the healthcare reductions for its pricing assumptions.*

*Discuss the implications for the pricing assumptions of each of the company’s products sold in that country:*

Assumptions should be set to reflect expected future experience ...

... so if it is expected that mortality will increase then assumptions should change ...

... although need to be mindful of premiums remaining competitive.

The impact on the general and insured populations may differ ...

... given that the insured population has undergone underwriting and the policies may have some exclusions to cover.

Need to consider the likely trends resulting from the reduction in healthcare spending.

However, there is only five years of data which may not be sufficient ...

... and there may be a time lag before the spending cuts affect morbidity and mortality.

Experts, eg doctors, may be required to extract meaning from the limited data available.

It may be that mortality rates still fall, despite the cuts ...

... eg if other factors such as medical advances are reducing mortality.

The provision of healthcare is a politically sensitive area.

If the health of the population suffers, then the government may reverse this decision. 

### 3-a.

*term assurance*

This policy provides a benefit on death within the term.

If healthcare spending is cut, then it might be expected that mortality will increase ...

... so consider increasing the mortality rate assumption to avoid losses.

### 3-b.

*medically underwritten annuity (where the policyholder provided information on their health status at application stage)*

Such annuities pay more to people in poor health with a shorter life expectancy.

Any increases in mortality would lead to an increase in profits for the insurer.

Underwriting costs may increase ...

... e.g. as less medical information may be available from the State so there may be a need for private medical screening.

### 3-c.

*private medical care*

May need to increase the business volume assumption ...

... as people seek private care if State provision is reduced ...

... and expense loadings can be reduced ...

... as there are more policies over which to spread fixed costs. 

### 3-d.

*funeral cover (where the insurance company pays the funeral costs for the policyholder).*

Tends to be purchased by those on lower incomes ...

... who may be more likely to be affected by the healthcare cuts, so death occurs sooner ...

... which is a concern for regular premium contracts if the benefit becomes payable before sufficient premiums have been received. 

### 4.

*A general insurance company offers a worldwide travel insurance policy that provides coverage against the following risks:*

- *medical cover required whilst in a foreign country*
- *loss of luggage whilst travelling*
- *flight delays of more than three hours.*

*Describe tools that the insurance company can use to aid the management and control of the above risks.*

#### Management controls

#### Underwriting at the proposal stage

The firm can make sure to use underwriting at the proposal stage to make sure risks are rated appropriately

- Preexisting medical conditions ...
- ... particularly those related to flying / changes in air pressure.
- Confirm which countries the policy holder plans to travel to ...
- ... in particular those countries with high traffic accidents.

#### Claims controls

The firm can use claims controls to limit the claims frequency and severity ...

... particularly reducing fraudulent claims.

E.g.

- Require doctors notes for medical claims ...
- ... in the native language of the insurer.
- receipts proving value of luggage
- confirmation from airlines re delays ...
- ... or third party confirmation e.g. skyscanner

#### Diversification

- countries of travel ...
- ... or at least medical regime e.g. EU health card accepting countries
- countries of stopover ...
- ... even if a traveller isn't stopping in a country ...
- ... the country may be more likely to lose luggage

#### ART

- catastrophe bonds ...
- ... travel losses may be high in hurricanes, earthquakes, etc.

#### Reinsurance

### 5.

#### 5-i.

[Expenses](21-expenses.md)

*Set out specific expense loadings that need to be considered for a long-term insurance contract.*

Expense **loadings** rather than expense items.

Initial expenses

- marketing and advertising
- medical underwriting
- initial administration of setting the policy up
- initial commission
- prelaunch development and design costs
- sales overheads
- initial investment costs
- other underwriting, e.g. financial underwriting


Renewal / ongoing expenses

- renewal admin
- premium collection
- investment costs
- renewal commission
- financial administration and reporting
- overheads
- system and development costs

Termination expenses

- claims underwriting
- claims administration

#### 5-ii.

*Describe how to carry out an expense analysis for the purpose of pricing a new long-term insurance contract.*

**Expense analysis** rather than running a model to price a contract.

Gather information on expenses

- Information is needed on the amount and type of expenses.
- Expenses data from other contracts that the insurer has written should be collated ...
- ... although need to consider its relevance to the new contract.
- Expense data may be collected from external sources, e.g. a reinsurer.
- If the new contract is available in the market ...
- ... then information about expenses should be collected relating to it ...
- ... as well as relating to other similar contracts.
- Any exceptional costs to be recouped over a period of time should be amortised appropriately. 

Split by type of expense

- Some expenses are direct ...
- ... and attributable immediately to a particular class of business.
- Some expenses are indirect ...
- ... and will need to be apportioned between the classes of business ...
- ... which can be difficult to do ...
- ... and may involve the use of timesheets or other approaches.
- Expenses can be split:
    - between fixed and variable
    - by function ...
    - ... e.g. initial, renewal, termination
    - by class of business ...
    - ... in as realistic a way as possible.

Loading of expenses into premiums

- Expenses need to be converted into expense loadings.
- An appropriate driver for expenses needs to be identified ...
- ... e.g. it may be appropriate to load per policy or as a percentage of premium.
- The loadings need to be appropriate for the new contract ...
- ... so may need to adjust from loadings used for other contracts. 

Allowance for inflation

- An allowance needs to be made for inflation ...
- ... both past inflation to increase past expenses to the present day ...
- ... and future inflation of expenses. 

Other considerations

- Need to consider whether cross-subsidies should be allowed ...
- ... e.g. between large and small policies.
- Need to decide whether (in the short term) the new contract will only cover its marginal costs ...
- ... or whether it should also contribute to overheads ...
- ... which must be met across the entire product range.

### 6.

#### 6-i.

*State what is meant by a "best estimate" assumption.*

An assumption that has an equal chance of overstating or understating the future experience.

#### 6-ii.

*Give two examples where a "best estimate" assumption would be suitable.*

Calculating the transfer value for a member leaving a final salary pension scheme ...

... in order to be fair to the member transferring, the remaining members and the sponsor.

Producing an insurance company’s accounts ...

... in order to give a true and fair view of the financial position of the company.

Calculating the value of a company being taken over by another company ...

... since a best-estimate approach could be viewed as fair to both companies.

Calculating the reserves required by an insurer ...

... if all margins for prudence are to be included in the capital held in addition to the reserves.


#### 6-iii.

*Describe three methods of allowing for risk in cashflows.*

[Bookwork](32-valuation-of-liabilities.md#different-methods-of-allowing-for-risk-in-cash-flows)

#### 6-iv.

*Discuss the purpose of equalisation reserves.*

[Bookwork](32-valuation-of-liabilities.md#equalisation-reserves)

#### 6-v.

*Suggest why a regulatory regime may not recognise equalisation reserves.*


## 7.

*A retirement benefits scheme in Country A (‘the Scheme’) currently has all of its funds invested in domestic, as opposed to overseas, assets. The Scheme’s managers are reviewing the fixed-interest bonds currently held. They propose to invest a portion of the Scheme’s assets in government bonds issued in Country B, which currently have a lower redemption yield than comparable bonds of Country A.*

[Investment strategy](14-choosing-an-appropriate-investment-strategy.md)

### 7-i.

*Suggest possible reasons for the Scheme managers’ proposal.*

[Overseas investment](10-other-investment-classes.md#overseas-investment)

The overseas bonds may be more secure, ie have lower default risk.

#### Match liabilities in foreign currency

The scheme may have some liabilities denominated in the currency of Country B ...

... so holding these bonds gives a better match.

Bonds of a longer term, appropriate to match the scheme’s liabilities, may be available in Country B.

#### Higher expected returns

The overall return achieved may be higher despite the lower yield if:

- yields are expected to fall further (and so prices rise) ...
- ... and so a capital gain is made (assuming the bonds are sold before maturity)
- the currency moves favourably ...
- ... ie the currency in Country B appreciates vs that of Country A.

There may be price inefficiencies ...

... which the scheme may be able to exploit.

There may be beneficial tax treatment, which increases returns.

#### Reduce risk by increasing level of diversification

There may be diversification benefits from investing overseas. 

### 7-ii.

*Discuss factors which the Scheme’s managers would need to take into account if the proposal were to be accepted.*

[Overseas investment](10-other-investment-classes.md#overseas-investment)

The scheme will be exposed to the risk of currency fluctuations.

Consider how well the bonds match ...

... e.g. by duration.

There may be different tax treatment of the bonds.

A custodian may be required.

Administration and dealing expenses may rise.

Consider whether there may be time delays in receiving information and carrying out transactions.

Consider whether there are any restrictions on such investment ...

... e.g. in the scheme rules.

Consider the political stability of the government in Country B.

Consider how easy it will be to obtain and interpret information from Country B.

Consider the level of default risk of the bonds ...

... e.g. by considering the government’s credit rating.

Consider the financial and economic situation in Country B, eg:

- level of fiscal deficit (now and expected future)
- level of outstanding national debt
- outlook for inflation
- exchange rate.

Consider how liquid the bonds are.

Consider whether changes in supply and demand for the bonds are expected in the future ...

... as this will impact their value.

Consider the level of expertise required to choose and manage these investments ...

... and therefore whether need to employ experts.

Explore how the switch will be achieved, eg its timing ...

... and the level of exposure want to the overseas bonds.

Consider which bond or range of bonds to choose.

There may be language barriers ...

... the implications of which will depend upon the amount of interaction required with Country B.

Consider how well the bonds match, eg by nature.

Consider whether time delays will be an issue ...

... this depends on the particular territory.

Consider whether there are difficulties in obtaining information ...

... this is likely to only be an issue for more remote territories.

### 7-iii.

*The Scheme’s managers decide, instead, to switch all of the Scheme’s government bonds (still of Country A) into recently issued corporate bonds from the retail sector of Country A.*

*Explain possible reasons for this decision.*

This decision may have been made to achieve higher returns ...

... eg because expect retail bonds to perform well in the future.

The decision to invest overseas may have been rejected because the investment and practical risks arising from overseas investment may have been unattractive.

The corporate bonds may be a good match ...

... for the term of the liabilities ...

... or currency.

This may be a short-term tactical switch, selling government bonds when they have a high value ...

... and buying back government bonds later ...

... if they are expected to fall in value ...

... eg due to an increase in supply. 

May have appointed a new fund manager with expertise in retail sector investment.

### 7-iv.

*Discuss the risk characteristics of retail sector corporate bonds.*

Corporate bonds are exposed to:

- default risk
- marketability risk
- inflation risk
- marketability risk

Companies in the retail sector are highly exposed to social trends ...

... which can lead to default ...

... e.g. if a retailer falls out of favour.

The performance of the retail sector as a whole depends on the economic outlook ...

... e.g. if enter a recession and consumer demand falls ...

... then there may be default on the bonds.

Increasing inflation may lead to a fall in retailers' profits as costs rise.

The ability to service the bonds will depend upon the retailers' sales and so profit ...

... which depends upon the success of the high street and online shops ...

... bearing in mind that the costs of any physical shops need to be covered.

The liquidity of the bonds may worsen if the sector is performing poorly.

If the bonds are downgraded then this may cause difficulties for the benefit scheme ...

... if it is required to hold bonds of a certain investment grade.

## 8.

### 8-i.

*Explain why it is necessary to have different mortality tables for different classes of lives.*

[Mortality and morbidity](20-mortality-and-morbidity.md#different-mortality-tables-for-different-classes-of-lives)

### 8-ii.

*Discuss, in each of the following separate cases, the expected differences in the level of mortality:*

[Mortality and morbidity](20-mortality-and-morbidity.md#factors-contributing-to-variations-in-mortality-and-morbidity)

*(a) term assurance policyholders versus general population*

Term assurance policyholders will be a subset of the general population, for example by:

- age
- gender
- income

Mortality may be lower for term assurance policyholders than the general population since:

- they are underwritten at outset ...

    ... and some substandard lives will be refused cover

- they will be underwritten at the claims stage and some causes of death may be excluded.

Mortality may be higher for term assurance policyholders ...

... as individuals who are worried about their state of health may be more likely to seek cover.

Overall, it is likely that mortality experience will be better for term assurance policyholders. 

*(b) an employer’s group life policy with an insurance company versus the insurance company’s term assurances*

Eligibility for cover

- The GLP will only cover employees ...
- ... and therefore exclude those unable to work ...
- ... so would expect average their fitness and general health to be better ...
- ... leading to lower mortality rates than for the ITA.

Underwriting requirements

- The underwriting is likely to differ between the two products.
- Under the GLP, there is likely to be little to no underwriting of employees, unless the sum assured exceeds the free cover limit ...
- ... and it may be that pre-existing conditions are covered.
- In contrast, policyholders under ITAs will be underwritten ...
- ... and some pre-existing conditions may be excluded.
- More underwriting of ITAs is likely to lead to better mortality experience.

Concentrations of risk

- The employees within a GLP will presumably be carrying out a narrow range of work, compared with the diverse range of jobs in the portfolio of ITAs, ...
- ... and this leads to concentration risk.
- The type of work / industry covered in the GLP could be more or less risky on average than that covered by the ITAs.
- Employees are likely to be based in one location ...
- ... and subject to climate-related risks associated with that location. 

*(c) pensioners of an employer’s directors’ pension scheme versus pensioners of the employer’s staff pension scheme.*

Need to consider relative differences in work carried out ...

... ie directors’ desk-based work vs staff who may do more manual work, which can affect mortality experience.

Directors will have greater wealth ...

... and may be able to afford better healthcare ...

... and may be better educated ...

... leading to lower mortality experience.

Directors may have had more stressful working lives ...

... leading to higher mortality.

Overall, directors may be expected to have better mortality experience than staff. 

### 8-iii.

*Discuss why it is important to monitor mortality experience. Your answer should include references to the cases in part (ii).*

[Monitoring](38-monitoring.md#reasons-for-monitoring-experience)
