## 1

*An insurance company (LifeCo) in a developed country with a high level of financial regulation is considering selling a new product providing long-term care benefits for individual citizens. LifeCo currently sells whole of life assurance and annuity products.*

*In recent years, the country's citizens have benefitted from significant improvements in life expectancy. Over the same period, there have been significant restrictions on government spending. This has led to the government reducing its financial support for meeting the costs of long-term care for its citizens. The government has indicated that it plans to cut its funding of long-term care further in future years.*

*In response to the government's proposed changes in long-term care funding, LifeCo intends launching a new long-term care product, which will be sold to people in employment. The product will offer a range of benefits that can be chosen by the individual. The benefits offered on the product may include:*

- *provision of nursing care in the policyholder's own home*
- *cash payments to cover residential care*
- *placements at purpose-built care homes, with different levels of care available depending on need*
- *cover for funeral costs.*

*Competition for this type of product is currently very low, with few competitors in the market. However, due to the reduction in government financial support for long-term care, a number of banks are also considering entering this market and offering each of the individual benefits listed above to their customers as standalone products.*

### 1-i

*List the advisers LifeCo may need to consult in setting up the new long-term care product. [3]*

- actuaries
- lawyers
- accountants
- regulatory experts
- marketing experts
- specialists in running care homes
- investment managers
- government officials
- reinsurers
- distributors / brokers

### 1-ii

*Discuss the factors LifeCo should consider before deciding to launch this new product. [10]*

Probably PNEFCPB because product launch.

Also consider COMBEL because financial product provider.

---

Risks

- Project: PNEFCPB

- Reputational

Practicalities

Strategic objectives

Costs

- expertise

Future trends

Contract

Modelling

### 1-iii

*Describe the roles that the regulatory authorities may have in respect of the launch and ongoing management of LifeCo’s new product. [5]*

pricing, including setting charges / fees applied under the product ...

... eg imposing a maximum cap on charges / fees in order to be fair to customers

product design - eg requiring a minimum level of benefits to be provided

underwriting / rating factors - eg not permitting different premium rates by gender

the sales process - in order to protect potentially vulnerable customers ...

... including requiring a "cooling-off period" to help ensure that policyholders understand the product they have purchased

reserving - eg prescribing the reserving basis
capital requirements - eg setting stress tests for capital requirement scenarios

investment - eg restricting the types of asset that can be held.

### 1-iv

*Discuss the risks that LifeCo faces from other parties that could affect the success of LifeCo's new product. [8]*

Parties

- competitors
    - lower prices
- reinsurers
    - default
- customers
    - demand
    - selection
- employees
    - expertise
    - misselling
- regulator
- investment managers
    - poor investment decisions

### 1-v

*Discuss how LifeCo could mitigate the risks identified in part (iv). [6]*

Risk management process

- Chief risk officer and risk manager
- for the new line of business.

Market research

Trainging employees

Management controls

- misselling training
- review of sales techniques
- e.g. record calls

Diversification

- of customers
- asset classes
- within asset classes
- of reinsurers

Reinsurance

- data on customers
- to help modelling of appropriate rating factors
- and so help to set premiums that reflect the level of risk

### 1-vi

*Discuss the level and cover of benefits that LifeCo could offer to policyholders who have stopped paying premiums. [4]*

The company would need to ensure that any benefits paid were fair to those leaving as well as to those remaining.

If the policyholder wishes to continue cover, this could be provided at a lower level ...

... eg covering only a proportion of the costs.

Alternatively, a surrender value could be paid with no continuation of cover ...

... eg a refund of premiums paid.

The insurance company would also consider;

- any regulatory requirements relating to discontinuance benefits or changing policy terms
- if competitors launch similar products, what they are offering on discontinuance.

### 1-vii

*Outline the assumptions LifeCo would need to set for pricing this product. [6]*

- medical inflation to project the cost of care
- price inflation to help project the cost of care e.g. salaries
- investment returns to help project cashflows used to pay benefits
- mortality rate
- lapses rate
- product mix - to properly account for any diversification benefits in the overall risk budget
- discount rate to find the present value of projected future cashflows
- rating factors and data availability / probability customers will want to provide this data
    - cannot assume this information will be available at the time the policy is underwritten even if it is available in a historical dataset LifeCo may have acquired
- frequency of premium payments
- interest rates on any debt used to finance the product
- cost of capital


## 2

*The government maintains and operates the railway system for the whole of a developed country. The government is responsible for ensuring that trains run on time and ticket prices provide customers with value for money. The train system is critical for most customers who commute to work in the main cities in the country.*

*The government has the following policies for refunding customers if a train journey is delayed or cancelled:*

- *15–29 minutes late = 20% of the customer's ticket price refunded*
- *30–59 minutes late = 40% of the customer's ticket price refunded*
- *60+ minutes late or train cancelled = 100% of the customer's ticket price refunded.*

*The government also maintains the roads in the country and has introduced a new traffic charge for the country’s six largest cities. The traffic charge is applied to vehicles entering or moving within each city traffic charging zone between 8 am and 10 am and between 4 pm and 7 pm on weekdays (excluding national holidays).*

*The traffic charge is inflation-linked, increasing each year. The government expects to keep the traffic charge and inflation-link policy in place for at least the next ten years.*

*The introduction of the new traffic charge has not been popular with citizens. Due to the poor punctuality of the train service, the introduction of the traffic charge has had a minimal impact on the number of vehicles entering the six largest cities.*

*The government is planning to outsource the maintenance of the railways to an overseas company, with the expectation that this will significantly improve the reliability and punctuality of trains. In addition, the government is evaluating the following package of proposals:*

*Action 1*

*To insure the risk of the train services being delayed / cancelled: in return for a premium, an insurance company would pay the necessary refunds on tickets.*

*Action 2*

*To sell the future rights to the traffic charge income to a pension scheme: in return for a one-off payment, the pension scheme would receive all future income from the traffic charge. The government is willing to split the rights into individual cities if more than one pension scheme is willing to invest. The rights would be sold using a bidding system to maximise the price.*

### 2-i

*Outline the risks of Action 1 from an insurance company’s viewpoint. [5]*

#### Claims frequency and severity

The key risk is having to pay out a higher number of refunds than expected ...

... as a result of there being more cancellations or delays.

This could occur, for example, due to poor weather.

There is also the risk of a higher average claims amount than expected, eg if the length of delays worsens ...

... and the risk of ticket price increases being higher than expected.

#### Other insurance risks

Expense risk: administration costs could be higher than expected.

Exposure risk: there could be a higher than expected volume of people travelling by trains.

#### Operational risk

Errors and other operational issues could arise in relation to the administration of this policy ...

... since the insurance company has no experience of this type of product.

There could be modelling or pricing errors ...

... resulting in mis-estimation of the expected refund costs.

#### External risk

There is a risk of unexpected government actions, eg making the refunds more generous.

### 2-ii

*Discuss the data an insurance company would need in order to price the contract under Action 1, including commenting on the limitations of the data. [10]*

#### Data required

Data would be required on delays and cancellations (over a reasonable past time period).

The data would ideally be broken down by;

- length of delay
- reason for delay / cancellation.

Data would be required on the amounts of refunds made ...

... and on the number of customers eligible to claim for a refund and the proportion of those who did.

Data would be needed on train ticket prices across all routes ...

... and on ticket price inflation.

Exposure data is also required: the number travelling.

Data on administration / operational expenses would also be needed for pricing the contract.

Data on investment returns would also be required.

#### Data limitations

There may be errors in or omissions from the data and this could be a significant issue, ...

 ... eg the exact numbers of travellers may not have been recorded.

There may be insufficient historical data available to enable credible estimates to be made of the future outcomes.

Historical data might not be a good reflection of future experience.

For example, due to;

- past abnormal events, e.g. bad storms
- future trends not being represented in the past data, eg due to the use of the new outsourcer
- the available data not being sufficiently up-to-date.

The data available from the government might not be in a format that is appropriate for the purposes of pricing an insurance contract.

### 2-iii

*Discuss the factors an insurance company would need to consider (other than the availability of data) when pricing the policy in Action 1. [12]*

#### Setting assumptions

Having analysed the data, the insurance company needs to consider how refund claim rates might change going forwards.

In particular, it needs to determine how claim rates might be impacted by the introduction of the new maintenance company.

In order to determine an appropriate expense assumption, the insurance company needs to consider how it will administer the new product, including the extent to which a new admin system is needed.

It will need to consider all the other expenses incurred in pricing and managing the product ...

... eg investment expenses.

The insurance company will also have to consider how it will claw back the set-up costs for the new contract, which are likely to be considerable; over what period these should be spread within the pricing.

The company needs to consider how it will allow in the pricing for the likelihood of refund amounts increasing, in line with ticket price inflation.

It needs to consider how premiums will be invested ...

... and what returns are likely to be achieved on those assets.

#### Pricing calculation

The insurance company needs to decide its profit target for this product.

It needs to decide what return on capital is required from shareholders, particularly if additional capital has to be raised.

The insurance company will also have to consider how it will set the following components of the pricing calculation;

- allowance for taxation, if relevant
- deduction for the cost of holding provisions and solvency capital requirements
- deduction for the cost of reinsurance, if this is to be used.

#### Premium structure

If premiums are paid on a regular basis, the insurance company needs to consider whether they will be reviewable or whether they would be guaranteed for a longer period.

#### Pricing process

The insurance company needs to consider whether it can adapt an existing model in order to perform the pricing, or whether it needs to purchase or build a new one.

It needs to consider whether it has sufficient in-house pricing expertise for this unusual contract ...

... or whether it will need to use experts / advisers.

#### External environment

The insurance company needs to consider whether there is any competition for providing this contract.

It needs to consider whether there are any impending regulatory or legislative changes that would impact the pricing of the product ...

... and whether there are any regulatory restrictions on how the premium could be invested, which impacts the investment assumption.

### 2-iv

*Describe the risk management tools available to an insurance company should it offer a contract under Action 1. [7]*



### 2-v

*Outline the reasons a pension scheme may want to invest in the roads where the new traffic charge will apply. [5]*

Liability matching

- nature i.e. infl-linked
- term i.e. received for 10 years which may be close to scheme's duration
- currency i.e. domestic

The expected return on the investment could be very attractive.

The investment could give good diversification from other assets held.

It could fit with the scheme’s investment objectives, eg wanting more infrastructure exposure.

There could be tax (or other government) incentives to purchase it.

There may be a lack of other good investment opportunities available at present.

### 2-vi

*Outline the advantages and disadvantages of using a discounted cashflow method to value the future traffic charge rights. [2]*

Adv

- Simple and easy to understand and communicate
- Easily made consistent with the basis used to value pension scheme's liabilities.
- It is unlikely that there will be an observable market value, so this method might be the only reasonable option.

Dis

- Very dependent on a suitable discount rate used to find the present value of projected future cashflows.
- Projecting the future asset proceeds is subjective, requiring numerous assumptions.

### 2-vii

*Discuss the issues that the pension scheme will need to consider in determining the cashflows to value the future traffic charge rights under Action 2. [6]*

#### Model

#### Setting assumptions

---

Frequency of chasflows

Length of time the cashflows will be received for

- Uncertainty around the 10 year period?
- Change in government

The amount of the cashflows

- expected future inflation
- success of the new train management firm
- level of frustration of drivers causing them to find alternative methods of travel
    - e.g. car pooling

### 2-viii

*Discuss the risks the pension scheme should consider before submitting a bid under Action 2. [8]*

#### Income lower than expected

#### Bidding process

#### Other

Operational

Political

Liquidity

External

### 2-ix

*Suggest how the government could evaluate whether the package of proposals is a success. [3]*

Financial

Non-financial


