## 1.

**Describe the capital management tools available to help providers**
**of financial products meet their responsibilities and achieve their goals.**

[Capital management](35-capital-management.md#capital-management-tools)


## 2.

**A European insurance company has a North American insurance company subsidiary.**

**Discuss how the capital requirements of this company may differ from those of a**
**similar European insurance company only operating within its domestic market.**

A European insurance company only operating within its domestic market is likely to only have one supervisor.

If all business is written through one company this will have the least capital transferability and substitution constraints as all the capital will be within the one company.

Some transferability and substitution constraints will exist where there is more than one company. However, a single supervisor will have responsibility to balance how it applies its regulations across all the entities of a group it directly supervises.

If a company only operates in its domestic market it will have less diversification resulting in more volatile experience and relatively higher capital requirements than a more diversified insurance company such as a European insurance company with a North American insurance company subsidiary.

Solvency II regulations apply to European insurance companies and European insurance groups. Solvency II will apply at group level across both the European insurance company and its North American insurance company subsidiary.

The North American insurance company subsidiary will also need to satisfy the North American capital and solvency requirements. These requirements may well be different and may require different level of reserves and have different permitted assets. The local assets available to invest in may also be different.

The North America regulations will be primarily concerned with the capital and solvency position of the US insurance company.

The regulator will want to ensure that capital above standard capital requirements is maintained by the subsidiary so that the company can withstand a level of adverse experience without recourse to its parent.

This means that capital above the standard capital requirement will be restricted reducing the capital available to the parent.

In times of stress within the parent the capital that can be made available to the group may be further reduced as the North American regulator may take a more conservative approach on permitted dividends.

The Solvency II capital standard has a different structure and form compared with the one operated by North American regulators.

Whilst at group level the Solvency II standard recognises diversification between companies this can still contribute significantly higher marginal group capital requirements than the local North American capital standard.

The relative behaviour of the capital standards will change over time due to their different design.

The North American business, although similar, may be slightly different. The products sold may be different and the risks covered could be different. These would lead to different capital requirements.

Currency issues my lead to different capital requirements e.g. mismatch reserve
needed.

## 3.

**A life insurance company has historically written individual annuity business.**
**The company has recently closed to new business and has promised shareholders**
**that this will lead to an increase in its profits over the next three years.**

### i.

**Describe the issues the insurance company needs to consider when projecting**
**its profits over the next three years.**

[Modelling](17-modelling.md)

The insurance company will need to build a model that will predict what it is expecting in the future. It is important that the elements of the expected profits are consistent in their own right.

It is very likely that the insurance company already has a model that projects its profits, but the model will need to be adapted to reflect the expected future cashflows (the company is now closed to new business).

In particular given the business is single premium annuity business, there will be no new premiums coming through and hence any projection in profit will come from changes in the expected experience of the business.

The insurance company will need to consider the assumptions to be used in its model, and whether being closed to new business will affect these expected assumptions.

Some assumptions will be unaffected (e.g. mortality) by closing to new business and therefore the approach to projecting the profits will be unchanged.

The expense assumptions will need to be reviewed significantly as assumptions like commission and initial expenses will be significantly reduced but the per policy maintenance costs may increase at a faster rate now it is closed due to diseconomies of scale.

The expense assumptions will need to be reviewed significantly as assumptions like commission and initial expenses will be significantly reduced but the per policy maintenance costs may increase at a faster rate now it is closed due to diseconomies of scale.

Given that the business will be a closed book, the company will need to consider whether the model will need to be refined if the book is very mature and whether the assumptions will need to be revised because it is running off.

Also the size of the fund and its expected position over the next three years will need to be considered in its assumptions as it may impact the capabilities to generate profits (e.g. restricted investment opportunities).

The investment strategy may need to change – there may be liquidity issues.

### ii.

**Discuss the management actions that could increase the profits for the**
**company over the next three years.**


[Expenses](21-expenses.md)

[Surplus management tools](37-surplus-and-surplus-management.md#levers-on-surplus-profit)

The insurance company has closed to new business and therefore management will want to get the expense base controlled as quickly as possible.

Management may want to accelerate the reduction in initial expenses by ensuring its sales staff are made redundant and will want to manage its redundancy costs. They will also want to reduce/make redundant as many of the staff responsible for setting up the business on the system as they can. They will again want to do this as quickly as possible (and will again look to manage costs).

Commission would automatically be reduced as no new business.

Will also need to reduce costs on other business functions e.g. could sell office buildings, move to smaller or cheaper premises.

Need robust claims controls procedures e.g. check annuitants still alive.

In terms of managing the back book, management will want to understand its options, i.e. it could be cheaper to outsource (or indeed offshore) elements of the managing of back books (e.g. operations, actuarial area) – will need to understand the relevant difference in costs.

Management could not offer any salary increases to its staff, the savings on this would be dependent on the assumptions used in projecting its profits.

Management will need to consider if they can increase investment income by potentially moving to more risky assets, but will need to consider the matching position and relevant regulations.

It also may not be possible to invest in some assets if the size of business is in decline.

If legislation allows, the insurance company could consider paying out transfer values to its policyholders. If this was done at a lower level than the reserves held then this would improve the profits of the company.

Management could consider selling some of its back book to other insurers, with the aim of receiving a premium that exceeds the value of the reserves for the business that is being sold.

Or indeed could consider its longevity reinsurance arrangements, which could lead to more profit.

Management could also consider whether being closed to new business allows the company to adopt a more effective tax policy. For example, if it accelerates its redundancy programme for initial expenses does this help in terms of tax payments.

If any of the benefits are discretionary (e.g. paying spouses benefits on death of policyholder) then management could not offer this anymore.

Management could consider other assumptions (e.g. mortality) and remove any prudence – however the regulator may be able to object.

Capital needed to support new business could be released.

## 4.

### i.

**Describe the following:**

- **Scenario analysis**
- **Stress testing**
- **Stochastic modelling**

[Evaluation of risks](28-risk-measurement-and-reporting.md#evaluation-of-risks)

### ii.

**An insurance company has recently adopted a new stochastic model to determine**
**its capital requirements. The results of the new model show that the company**
**needs to hold less capital than was calculated under the previous model.**
**An actuary has recently started working for the insurance company and has expressed**
**concern that the capital requirement is much lower than he was expecting.**

**Discuss the actions the actuary should take.**

[Actuarial advice](01-actuarial-advice.md#professional-framework)

The new stochastic model is likely to be more complex. It may model the company more accurately and allow for diversification and management actions so a lower capital requirement may be expected. The actuary will need to spend time understanding the new model.

The actuary may have previously worked for a company carrying out different business with different types of policies and policyholders and/or operating in different countries. This may explain why the results are different from those he expected.

The actuary will need to find out more about the model to ensure he understands how it works. He could talk to his colleagues about the new model and also arrange to meet those responsible for developing it. He could go through the documentation and the assumptions made.

He can check the data input and check for any obvious errors. Will also need to check the regulatory requirements for this model.

The actuary could do sensitivity testing on the model to ensure that by changing an assumption has the desired effect to the results – this would improve the confidence in the model

He could understand the reconciliation from the old model if there is one and also whether assumptions were refined as part of the modelling changes

He should also ensure that he understands the business of the company well.

This may give him enough information to be confident with the results. If this was the case, no further action would be necessary.

The results will only be as good as the model used.

If he still has concerns about the model then this may be the reason for the unexpected results.

In this situation, he will need to talk to his boss. If she is happy with the model the actuary may need to recognise that this view is valid.

He should consider any professional guidance. He could also take advice from the professional body.

If he still not satisfied, he may need to take this further.

## 5.

### i.

**State the main aims of a professional body**

- Set and impose professional standards
- Serve the public interest and improve public confidence
- Act as a trade body for its members
- Co-ordinate research

### ii.

**Suggest the problems that can arise if such a body’s rules on professional**
**standards are too demanding.**

Can be a drain on time, and cost extra money, for various stakeholders.
Examples:

- professional body may take longer drafting/maintaining/disciplining the rules 
- members may take longer preparing and checking work 
- increased costs will get passed onto clients 
- who may consider the additional cost unnecessary/excessive 
- for example even straightforward work may need to be peer-reviewed in excessive detail 

Clients may decide to employ different professionals to do the same work instead (to get it cheaper/quicker), 

unless there are statutory limitations on who can do the work.

Demanding rules might get rigidly adhered to, instead of judgment being applied,  where the latter may have produced a better outcome. 

Demanding rules may be related to inflexibility/slowness to change to prevailing circumstances (so that poor advice may be given). 

And the professionals involved may be less inclined to seek innovative/improved approaches to their work. 

It may reduce the reputation of the profession. 

It may be more difficult to attract new members to the profession.

### iii.

**Outline the areas that an actuary is usually required to certify when**
**performing a statutory certification of the adequacy of the valuation of assets**
**and liabilities for an insurance company.**

## 6.

**A small general insurance company is based in a rural area.**
**It mainly sells pet insurance.**
**The majority of this business is obtained through local veterinary practices**
**that act as agents and refer their customers to the insurance company.**

**The owner of one of the largest veterinary practices in the area has proposed**
**that the insurance company expands by providing livestock insurance for the large**
**local farming community.**

### i.

**Suggest how both the nature of the cover provided under this new line of business**
**and the expected claims experience for livestock insurance is likely to differ from**
**that of the existing pet insurance business.**

Cover will be provided for different animals e.g. cattle and sheep as opposed to cats and dogs say.

These animals will be kept in different locations and will be susceptible to different illness.

Livestock animals may be covered as a herd.

Whilst the basic perils covered will be the same, some will be a lot more important or have a different focus.

Vet’s fees would be a regular cost of business so not generally insurable at the routine level but higher than expected costs or emergency treatment would be. This would probably mean different terms and conditions.

For example theft (cattle rustling), liability (damage if animals get loose) or cover linked to transport (to market say) will more significant risks.

There may be cover for fertility guarantees.

However, livestock is owned for business purposes.

Therefore cover related to loss of profits will need to be provided i.e. loss on death or illness is more than just vet or funeral costs.

Cover – sum insured may vary depending on number of young at any point in time

Claims are likely to be a lot higher on average – livestock can be very valuable and costs of treatment per case would be more.

For example vets would need to be called out in emergencies at unsociable times – weekends and nights.

Claims may be more frequent or more expensive due to health and safety legislation. For example drastic action if illness breaks out or compliance with food safety measure – basically a legislation risk.

Pet insurance will tend to cover lots of “small risks” whereas livestock will have fewer but “larger risks” – claims will be lumpier and more volatile.

Livestock insurance will involve significant concentration risks.

Illnesses will spread quickly amongst a herd and could easily contaminate
other farms.

### ii.

**Suggest the potential problems the insurance company would need to consider were**
**it to expand as proposed.**

The insurance company has no experience of writing this type of business.

This type of business is materially different from the business it currently writes.

Hence it will lack relevant expertise – the expertise it does have is not really that useful (ok in general but not in specifics).

So, for example, it will need to familiarise itself will the specific legislative issues surrounding this business e.g. compulsory cover and any relevant regulations.

Likewise, any data it has (e.g. claims experience) will not be of use when considering livestock insurance.

The insurance company will have difficulty in obtaining suitable assumptions to be used for pricing and reserving.

It is likely that new staff or retraining of existing staff will be needed.

Capital will be needed to fund the expansion.

As well as staff costs, there will be office, systems costs – existing infrastructure probably won’t be sufficient.

As a small company, they may not have the reserves to be able to finance this and they may also struggle to raise outside finance at a reasonable cost – e.g. if investors consider the expansion to be risky.

Linked to this, is the issue of the different nature of the risk profile.

Larger, more volatile claims may need higher reserves (e.g. statutory solvency), which the insurance company may not be able to provide – a form of new business strain.

Similarly, the insurance company may end up being over-reliant on a few large policies say with large farms – this will increase volatility and the risk of non-renewal.

The business is likely to be yearly renewable. There may be some new business strain but this may not be a big issue.

However, any assumption of significant renewals may cause problems if they don’t materialise.

The insurance company must consider the marketability of the product and how it will attract the new business.

It would appear that they have a limited sales force and contacts with potential policyholders.

Clearly the owner of the vets practice sees an opportunity here.

The insurance company may end up being over-reliant on this practice for its business (with pet insurance, more vets, more policyholders hence less dependence on external parties).

This will have cost implications (commission to the vet) and a weakness in negotiating position.

There may be a concentration risk by farm or location if the business is not well diversified.

Will need to consider the competition in this market.

Existing insurer’s may cut rates or have strong relationships with policyholders so making entry difficult or expensive.

There will be potential moral hazards once the insurance is in place.

There will be volume risks if the level of business is not as anticipated.

### iii.

**Discuss how reinsurance might be used to mitigate some of the problems described**
**in part (ii).**

[Capital management](35-capital-management.md#capital-management-tools)

Reinsurance cover can help to mitigate the problems caused by the different risk profile i.e. potentially larger and more volatile claims.

In particular, non-proportional reinsurance will control the impact of large claims – single or aggregate (a few large claims could be serious).

Catastrophe cover may be especially useful given the concentration risk e.g. an outbreak of BSE.

Proportional reinsurance may help the insurance company take on more new business than would otherwise be possible (by reducing capital needed).

This may be important here since diversification across many farms and by location will help with the concentration risk.

The use of reinsurance will involve the payments of premiums to the reinsurance company, which may have implications for liquidity and the ceding of profit as well as risk i.e. there are downsides as well.

It is likely that some reinsurance companies will have experience of covering livestock risks.

Hence they will have access to data and possess technical skills, which would be of use to the insurance company.

For example, a reinsurance company may be able to provide training, second its own staff or help develop procedures (underwriting say), which will help set the new business up.

But the insurance company will have to pay for this help directly or indirectly.

Likewise, as this is a very niche market and product (quite localised) it is important to select a reinsurance company that has relevant data.

The use of financial reinsurance may help with the insurance company’s capital or financing needs. But care will be needed since the legal position may not be clear.
