
## 1.

*A university in Country A has a large campus in a city. The university currently has 30,000 students and 5,000 employees.*

*The university offers its employees various benefits. These include life cover, cover for sickness and disability, as well as membership of a pension scheme. Some employees are in a defined benefit pension scheme and others in a defined contribution scheme.*

*The university is looking to significantly increase the number of students it has as part of its expansion plan to become a world leading university. It is considering whether to expand the current campus, open a new campus in a different city or open a new campus in a different country. It is consulting a number of different professional advisers as part of this process.*

*The government in Country A has recently announced legislation which will substantially increase the state pension benefits to all citizens in Country A. At the same time state pension benefits increase so will the state pension age. The net effect is expected to give rise to additional costs and tax rates in Country A are expected to rise to help fund these costs.*

*The university is concerned about the long-term affordability of its pension commitments and has asked your company to advise if this may be a suitable opportunity to consider closing the defined benefit scheme and also to reduce contributions to the defined contribution scheme.*


### i.

*Suggest why the government may have decided to increase the state pension.*

- [Benefits and providers of benefits](05-benefits-and-providers-of-benefits.md#state)

#### Benefits to meet need of citizens

The current State pension may be insufficient to meet the needs of citizens.

#### Minimum standard of benefit

The current level of benefit may be too low for poorer citizens who do not have other provision.

#### Paternalism

The government may want to ensure that citizens without additional private pension arrangements are looked after ...

... and many of these citizens may be relying on additional State benefits.

#### Simple administration

Paying additional State pension may be administratively simpler (vs means-tested benefits).

#### Popularity

An increase in State pensions may be driven by political pressure or a change in government.

#### Private provision

Private pension arrangements may be inadequate for some citizens.

Provision may be lower due to employers reducing their contributions to DC arrangements ...

... or closing DB schemes.

It could also be due to employees being unwilling or unable to pay contributions.

#### Encouragement

The government may have failed to encourage citizens to pay more into private pensions.

#### Fairness

The increase in State benefits could be seen as fairer.


### ii.

*Outline why the university may be concerned about its pension commitments.*

- [Benefits and providers of benefits](05-benefits-and-providers-of-benefits.md#employers)

#### Cost control

The current pension commitments may be relatively large.

#### Predictability of cost

Pension commitments may be difficult to predict and may be greater than expected.

Pension costs may be high or volatile ...

... for example, due to rising inflation or falling interest rates ...

... and could be growing in future.

The university is bearing the financial risks of the scheme, which may be greater than expected ...

... especially for the DB scheme. 

If pension costs are greater than expected, it may not be possible to fund the extra cost by increasing, for example:

- student fees
- employee contributions.

#### Regulation

Changes in regulation may have led to an increase in pension costs.

#### Opportunity cost

Rising pension costs may mean the university has less money available to meet other costs ...

... which could impact on expansion plans and future pension provision.

#### Attract and retain

It may be difficult to attract and retain staff if the DB scheme is closed.


### iii.

*Discuss the options that may be available to the university regarding its pension commitments.*

- [Insolvency and Closure](34-insolvency-and-closure.md#closure-of-sponsored-benefit-scheme)-ish (not insolvent)

#### DC Scheme

- Level of contributions the university makes to the DC scheme could be reduced.
- The university may wish to reduce its contribution given the State pension is being increased.
- The members’ contribution rate could be increased. 

#### DB scheme

##### Future service

Close to new members

- Could close the scheme to new members but still remain open to accrual for existing members.
- New employees would join the DC scheme.
- The university will still need to make contributions to the DB scheme for current active members. 

Closure to accrual

- Could close the scheme to any future accrual of benefits.
- Existing members may receive reduced benefits, eg due to underfunding or loss of salary link.
- Existing active members of the DB scheme could join the DC scheme.
- Members moving from the DB scheme may need to be offered a higher contribution rate to make joining the DC scheme attractive ...
- ... which may be considered unfair by the existing members of the DC scheme. 

Benefit reduction

- The university could reduce future benefits to make the DB scheme more affordable, eg by:
    - reducing accrual rate
    - raising retirement age in line with State pension age
    - capping the number of years of service that can be used in the calculation of the pension
    - capping the salary that can be used in the calculation of the pension
    - making the scheme career average, if it is currently final salary
    - integrating the scheme with the new (higher) State pension to reduce costs. 

##### Past service

Transfer to DC scheme

- one-off transfer value of the benefits in the DB scheme could be made to the DC scheme
- university would not be expected to make further contributions

Cash

- lump sum could be offered to individual members to make their own pension arrangements

Buyout

- The DB scheme's liabilities could be transferred to an insurer ...
- ... which reduces risk but comes at a cost

#### Restrictions

- pension arrangements available at other universities
- whether any option chosen is allowed under regulation ...
- ... and the scheme rules
- how it will affect the reputation of the university
- human resource issues due to benefit changes
- It may be difficult to:
    - reduce the contribution rate to the DC scheme if there are competitive pressures
    - change to DC if other universities still offer DB schemes.
- It may be undesirable or illegal for members to be given a lump sum (as it may be squandered).
- The strength of any trade unions will need to be considered ...
- ... and the likelihood of any industrial action being taken.

### iv.

*Discuss the impact of the university’s expansion on its stakeholders.*

---

- current students
- potential new students
- employees
- local residents
- local businesses
- government
- regulator
- local council
- directors
- owners (if private).


---

#### Students

- Expansion may attract professors from different backgrounds
- especially if international expansion
- enabling better communication and teaching for more students.
- Although, the student / professor ratio may become less favourable for strudents
- resulting in a worse experience for the students
- and potentially worse grades.

#### Professors

- Expansion may come with additional research spending
- giving them more satifying work
- and potentially more opportunities to do research that benefits all society.

#### State (domestic and foreign, depending on option chosen)

- More students in higher education may lead to more taxes in the future
- assuming those in higher education will go on to, on average, earn higher salaries
- allowing more spending on state services e.g. healthcare.
- If state benefits e.g. healthcare are free at the point of use
- and there are more students who are unlikely to use private healthcare services
- there may be more of an initial strain on state services in the short term.

#### Professional advisors

- Can provide advice on the expanion
- e.g. legal and planning applications.
- Potentially larger talent pool to employ from.

#### Regulators

- Education regulation will have a larger university to regulate
- and regulating international university will have its own complications.
- As a larger employer, pensions regulator will want to be sure the pensions benefits of
existing members are protected and not harmed by the expansion.

### v.

*Discuss how actuaries could contribute to the university’s expansion plan.*

- [Actuarial advice](01-actuarial-advice.md#advice-given)

Actuarial control cycle can be used.

Risk management control cycle can be used.

### vi.

*Outline how the university could raise the capital needed for its expansion plan.*

- [Capital maangement](35-capital-management.md)

#### Equity

- If it is a proprietary company, the university can raise equity capital.
- This can be achieved with a rights issue or placement of new shares

#### Securitisation

- selling a bond for cash to the financial markets by a special purpose vehicle
- repayments (coupons and redemption payment) are contingent on future profits 
of the university
- although this is a complex and non-standard source of finance
- which the university may not have the expertise to use without professional experts

#### Banking products

- Liquidity facilities can help the university with short-term capital needs
- Senior unsecured financing is an option if the university has an over-arching
group company
- Capital would be raised by the parent company and then provided to the university.

#### Internal sources of capital

- Could use any long-term funds the university has available ...
- ... eg from reserves or donations.
- The university could hold fundraising events on campus or ask alumni.

#### External sources of capital

- Tuition fees could be increased.
- The income from future tuition fees could be securitised.
- The university could raise debt capital, eg from loans or bonds.
- The university could apply for a grant, eg from the government.
- The university could partner with industry or another university.
- A privately-owned university could raise equity capital.
- Current tuition fees could be directed towards the project.


### vii.

*Discuss the risks involved in the expansion plan, indicating for each how that risk might be managed.*

PNEFCPB

#### Project risk

- Risk: The project may take longer to complete than expected.
- Management: The project should be well planned.
- Risk: There will be risks related to the physical expansion ...
- ... for example, with any contractors used.
- Management: Investigate the background of all contractors ...
- ... and the conditions of sites.
- Enforce tight contract wording, with penalties if the project goes over budget.
- Risk: The cost of the new buildings may be greater than expected.
- Management: Take action as soon as there is any sign of an increase in costs.
- The project should be costed in advance.
- A fixed fee could be arranged for some of the work.
- Risk: There may be additional problems if the expansion is in a new unfamiliar city or country ...
- ... with additional research required.
- Management: Use local expertise to gain knowledge of the city or country.
- Risk: The university may not be more attractive to students, so numbers do not increase...
- ... because the quality of the university has not improved.
- Management: High quality infrastructure and high quality staff will be required.
- High quality PR / marketing will be needed.
- The university should implement and monitor performance against quality standards.


#### Political risk

- Risk: There may be problems obtaining planning permission.
- Management: Discuss the project further with the planning authorities.
- Risk: There may be political risks ...
- ... and regulatory risks, eg planning permission.
- Management: Investigate whether planning permission has been given for similar projects.
- Have alternative project plans to suggest if initial planning permission is not achieved. 

#### Natural risk

- Risk: Problems during the construction phase resulting from poor weather and natural disasters.
- Management: Take out buildings or catastrophe insurance.

#### Economic risk

- Risk: Additional risks arise if a university is set up overseas, eg currency risk.
- Management: Could use derivatives to protect against currency risks.

#### Financial Risk:

- The university may not be able to raise the money needed for the expansion.
- Management: Consider using methods in part (vi) such as partnering with another university.

#### Business risk

- Risk: If the expansion is unsuccessful, it may damage the university’s reputation.
- Management: Increase the chance of success by researching other universities that have expanded and by surveying students. 


### ix.

*Other areas where actuaries could provide advice to the university*

The actuary can advise on:

-  different types of insurance cover
- cost control, eg cheaper alternative insurance products
- other employee benefits
- short-term and long-term investment strategy of university assets
- setting future tuition fees
- identifying risks to the university.

The actuary can advise on:

- flexible benefits schemes
- investing the DB scheme’s assets
- managing risks for the university.


### viii.

*Suggest the types of insurance cover the university may need.*

- business interruption
- cyber
- catastrophe
- key person
- employer's liability
- public liability
- commercial building
- moveable property

### x. xi. xii.

[Data](18-data.md#big-data)

## 2.

*The government of a developed country (Country B) is concerned about the low levels of personal savings by its citizens. The government is inviting a wide range of banks, insurance companies and investment companies to provide new and simple types of savings products to help meet its concerns.*

*The government is considering offering a range of incentives to help encourage increased savings.*

*The government wants the new types of savings products to:*

- *be low cost from the saver’s point of view*
- *give the saver maximum flexibility on when they pay money into and take money out of the product.*

*An established investment company is considering launching a suitable product.*

*The company will administer this product as a unit-linked savings plan. There will be no death benefit. For this plan, the government will allow only one charge to be applied. The charge will take the form of an annual management charge levied on the unit fund, subject to a maximum of 0.75% of the fund value. The company wishes to make the product appeal to a wide range of potential savers.*

*The product will be aimed at all potential investors including those who might be less financially sophisticated.*

*The company needs to be able to compete with planned products of its competitors; some of these products are simple and non-linked.*

### 2-i.

*Discuss why the government might want to increase the levels of personal savings in Country B.*

- [Benefits and providers of benefits](05-benefits-and-providers-of-benefits.md#state)

#### Macroeconomics

Short-term economic growth

- Economy may be heading for lower growth or recession ...
- ... and so the gov't wants people to be prepared for this by saving more now
- The government may wish to avoid volatile economic growth.

Long-term economic growth

- There may be a wish to stimulate investment in the economy ...
- ... as such investment should lead to economic growth
- Personal savings lead to investment in businesses ...
- ... so increased personal savings leads to greater private sector investment ...
- ... as well as greater public sector investment in infrastructure ...
- ... for example, in new technology and automation.
- This additional investment can help:
        - with demographic trends such as an ageing population
        - businesses increase productivity
        - keep government bond yields low due to increased investment in them ...
        - ... which can keep real interest rates low and further stimulate investment.

Short-term inflation and spending

- If savings are too low, spending is likely to be inappropriately high ...
- ... which may lead to high inflation in the short term
- There may be short-term economic concerns ...
-  ... as low levels of savings may result in an unstable economy that is too reliant on spending.
- The government may wish to reduce spending on imports, relative to exports (which may happen if interest rates and so the exchange rate falls).
Long-term inflation and spending
- Gov't may wish to avoid excessive personal debt

#### Reduce burden

If people save for themselves, gov't may be able to reduce spending on e.g.

- social security
- medical costs
- housing
- long-term care
- pensions

#### Meet individuals needs

Individuals may need such savings to be able to afford a deposit to buy or rent a house

#### Paternalism

There may be paternalistic reasons why the government wants its citizens to have savings ...

... for example, to be able to cope when emergencies arise.

#### Popularity

Gov't may have promised to increase personal savings in election manifesto

#### Tax

The government may be aiming to increase tax revenue ...

... eg it may expect to receive more taxes from savings.

#### Education

Encouraging people to save helps avoid the stresses arising of getting into debt, e.g. not being able to pay bills.

### 2-ii.

*Suggest, with reasons, possible encouragement and incentives that could be offered by the government to increase the levels of personal savings.*

#### Who

Incentives will be needed for both savers ...

... and product providers

#### When

Incentives can be given for all durations e.g.

- starting a savings plan
- maintaining regular contributions
- increasing contributions
- not cashing in plans

#### What

Requiring auto-enrolment

- Employers could be required to offer a savings product.
- Employees could be required to be automatically enrolled, but may be able to opt-out.
- There could be minimum contribution requirements for employers and employees.
- A default savings fund could be available for employers who are unable or unwilling to offer their own savings product. 

Providing a safety net for financial providers

- The government could protect savings up to a limit.
- The safety net is likely to cover failure of a product provider ...
- ... rather than market-related losses. 

Offering tax incentives

- contributions made ...
- ... both by the individual and their employer
- investment returns
- benefits paid.

    It may be too expensive to offer incentives on all of contributions, investments and benefits ...

    ... so the government will need to consider which types of investors are to be targeted.
    
    For example, tax incentives may not be effective for those who pay little or no tax ...

    ... instead it may be more effective to exclude such savings when assessing means-tested benefits.

Providing top-ups or investment guarantees

- a lump sum paid in by the government at entry or exit
- matching regular contributions
- a loyalty bonus, to encourage ongoing saving.

    There are likely to be constraints to limit costs ...
    ... eg a limit on the amount or multiple of matched contributions.

Permanent incentives

- It may be possible to guarantee that the incentives are offered over the long term ...
- ... eg over the next 40 years, so that all current workers can plan for retirement.
- This may require cross-party agreement but would ensure stability and confidence in the system.

Cap charges

- The rates of charges could be capped, e.g. no increases to the 0.75% pa cap for the next 40 years. 

Education

- The government could explain to citizens the importance and benefits of saving.
- They could offer free information and advice ...
- ... such as simple projection tools. 

Guaranteed return on saving

- A guaranteed return would increase the attraction of the product for less sophisticated investors.

Simplified regulation

- Simplified marketing literature ...
- ... and cooling-off periods could be applied.

#### Why

Give confidence to savers

Protect savers

Encourage savings for particular purposes e.g.

- buying a house
- starting a business

### 2-iii.

*Discuss how the company’s need to administer the product as a unit-linked plan, and yet be able to appeal to the complete range of financial sophistication of its target market, could be achieved by appropriate wordings of its marketing literature.*

[Contract design](22-contract-design.md#making-disclosure-more-or-less-simple)

#### Description

All literature should be accurate, clear and not misleading ...

... to ensure investors are treated fairly.

Some investors’ sophistication and risk appetite may be between the two extremes. 

Unsophisticated investors

- If the marketing literature does not explain in simple terms how a unit-linked product works ...
- ... then it will not be understood by many potential savers ...
- ... especially those who are less financially sophisticated.
- A unit-linked approach is relatively complicated compared with, for example, a bank account ...
- ... so the explanation of this product will need to be simple enough to be understood.
- This may mean, for example, little or no mention of:
- other available funds switching options ...
- ... although if it is possible to lose as well as gain money then this needs to be explained.
- If the product cannot be made accessible to unsophisticated investors, business volumes are likely to suffer ...
- ... as is the resulting profitability ...
- ... especially given there may be a large number of less sophisticated potential investors ...
- ... and these may be the ones that the government is particularly trying to encourage to save.
- A choice of funds may complicate the marketing, leading to lower sales volumes.


Sophisticated investors

- The marketing literature is likely to be very different for more sophisticated investors ...
- ... with different and more detailed descriptions ...
- ... eg descriptions about how units are priced.
- Marketing literature would need to explain the trade-off between risks and expected return.

#### Product

The government wishes to attract a complete spectrum of savers ...

 ... so more than one version of the unit-linked product would likely be marketed. 

For less sophisticated savers a simplified product, eg:

- offering a default fund
- a deposit fund with interest added ...

    ... and a guarantee that the fund will not fall ...

    ... which may be appropriate given less sophisticated investors will not want to take any or much risk with their savings.

In the second case, the company could administer a deposit fund in a unit-linked way ...

... but could explain it as a deposit account rather than a unit-linked fund ...

... which is not a misrepresentation as long as the fund does not fall ...

... however, regulatory approval may be needed.

If there is a more sophisticated product available, this could be pointed out. 

For sophisticated investors, a unit-linked approach could offer flexibility

- in the choice of investment funds
- switching / redirection options
- this product may be only one of a wide range available. 

### 2-iv.

*Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the government’s restriction on charges on the unit-linked plan, from the viewpoint of savers.*

#### Advantages

A cap may encourage investors to save.

It reduces the chance of charges being inappropriately high.

The cap is simple to understand ...

... making it easier to estimate the charges in advance.

Savers with smaller funds may find a percentage charge more attractive than a flat fee. 

#### Disadvantages

All providers may charge the maximum of 0.75% pa.

The cap is the same for all type of fund ...

... but a simple deposit fund should cost less to run than an equity or property fund.

Lower charges may mean customer service is adversely affected ...

... especially where more complex funds are offered.

The size of the fee is only one part of a more complex assessment of overall value for money ...

... eg also consider investment returns ...

... and quality of customer service.

Sophisticated savers might be willing to pay higher fees to be able to invest in more complex funds that may offer the potential for higher investment returns.

The cap will restrict the ability of savers to access:

- the best investment managers
- certain assets
- active management ...
    
    ... given passive management is likely to be cheaper.

Some savers will value customer service and may be willing to pay more for this ...

... especially more sophisticated savers, who may value complex services ...

... such as online projection tools.

Consider whether savers understand the charge.

Small percentage differences in charges can have a major impact on the final fund value.

A charge of 0.75% pa may not be appropriate.

Competition may reduce the rate below the cap so that it is too low.

Some costs such as collecting premiums may be relatively fixed rather than related to fund size ...

... however, this might offset the additional expenses incurred for riskier investments, making a common cap across all funds look more reasonable. 

### 2-v.

*Describe how and when the charges on the unit-linked plan could be disclosed to savers.*

[Reporting results](33-reporting-results.md)

PRICE

#### When

Disclosure should be made:

- before or at inception
- regularly through the policy's life
- on disinvesting any money
- at any time on request.

Charges will need to be disclosed at appropriate times.

Any changes to the charges should be disclosed.

#### How

Information should be disclosed in a clear way.

The style of communication should reflect the level of financial sophistication. 

The charges could be disclosed:

- in marketing literature
- in statements to investors
- on the company’s website.

An outline of investment and transaction costs would be an appropriate starting point.

Some explanation of the reasons for charges would increase the effectiveness of disclosures.

For a simple deposit fund, could simply disclose the percentage reduction to the interest rate ...

... rather than setting out charges explicitly.

However, some people may not understand percentages ...

... as charges may appear small in percentage terms but can have a large cumulative impact.

It may be more appropriate to show charges in monetary terms ...

... reflecting the actual amounts invested by each saver, and the amounts charged.

More detailed disclosure to financially sophisticated investors may be possible, eg ...

- with discussion of value for money
- showing the compounding effect of charges over time ...

    ... eg over 5, 10, 20 years etc.


### 2-vi.

*The company has now launched the savings product. Discuss the possible risks to the company.*

Areas of risk for a financial provider: BCMLOE

#### Business

Expenses vs charges

- There is a risk of expenses exceeding charges, leading to losses being made ...
- ... particularly due to the charges cap.
- There is a risk of lower average policy sizes ...
- ... so that charges are too low to cover expenses.
- There is the risk of more fund switches than expected, as there are no explicit charges for these.

High business volumes

- There is a risk of higher than expected business volumes ...
- ... meaning that administration may become stretched, leading to poor customer service.

Low business volumes

- There is a risk of lower than expected business volumes ...
- ... meaning that the company is unable to recoup its fixed development costs.

Lapse risk – existing products

- There is risk of losses being made due to lapses from existing products ...
- ... particularly if the new product is similar and/or its charges are lower.

Lapse risk – new products

- Lapse rates on the new products may be high, and difficult to estimate.
- Early withdrawals are a particular risk, given that no initial or exit charges are allowed.

#### Credit

- If a new administration system is purchased, there is the risk of teething problems or failures of the provider of the system. 

#### Market

- There is a risk of worse than expected investment performance, leading to lower charges ...
- ... and making it difficult to attract and retain investors.
- There is a risk of higher than expected inflation of expenses. 

#### Liquidity

- There is a risk that the assets chosen are illiquid, which may depress unit prices ...
- ... which may in turn lead to even more savers wanting their money back.

#### Operating

fraud or poor customer service 

from new systems or infrastructure 

Data security

#### External

Governemt

- withdraw or reduce the incentives offered
- reduce the expenses cap in the future
- impose harsher conditions on providers.

Competition

- ... from competitors offering more attractive products or lower charges.

Market forces

- There is the risk that the government’s savings initiative is not popular ...
- ... and the public will not invest their savings with such providers.


### 2-vii.

*A group of private investors is considering setting up a new company to provide the same type of unit-linked product as the established investment company.*

*Outline the main issues and opportunities that private investors would face, compared with the established investment company.*

#### Issues

Practicalities

- The new company would have the practical problems of setting up a new office and systems.

Externalities

- The new company will lack credibility with the regulator ...
- ... and so be unable to demonstrate the required expertise, experience and capital.

Technicalities

- The new company will lack a track record of successful investment. 

#### Opportunities

Practicalities

- Unlike the established companies, the company is not invested in existing systems that may not be suitable ...
- ... and so may be able to produce more innovative products and cheaper systems.

Externalities

- The new company may be quicker to react to evolving external events, e.g. cyber threats.

Technicalities

- The new company may be free of historical or reputational problems, unlike other companies. 
