# 2019 September Paper 2

## 1.

### 1-i.

*\[5\]*

*Set out the reasons why ABC may wish to purchase XYZ.*

---

Exposure to XYZ's domestic market

- economy in XYZ's country may be growing rapidly - creating a good opportunity for profits
- motor insurance market better margins than ABC's market's margins
- ABC may feel this is less risky or expensive than starting a subsidiary in XYZ's market

Acquire knowledge and expertise

- XYZ is an established player that will have acquired good talent along the way
- ABC can learn from these employees

Synergies

Market leader

- XYZ is a more attractive prospect than other firms in the industry
- who have smaller market shares

Economies of scale

- by combining with ABC, the probably smaller domestic firm XYZ may see expenses drop and margins increase
- perhaps lifting XYZ back into profits

Good price

- given XYZ has not been profitable in recent years
- which is likely reflected in the price of XYZ

---

to expand

to reduce risk

to increase profitability

to benefit from synergies

external factors.

- tax

### 1-ii.

*\[10\]*

*Describe, using examples, how XYZ can manage and control its risks in connection with its motor insurance policies.*

The risk management process can be used

The actuarial control cycle can be used

#### Transfer

(Not really for this qu.)

Reinsurance (and other risk transfer tools, e.g. ART) could also be used.

Risk transfer tools may help XYZ to smooth its profits ...

... and reduce its exposure, e.g. to single large risks.

XYZ may benefit from the expertise of a reinsurer.

The use of reciprocal quota share reinsurance can improve diversification.

#### Diversification

Diversification can be between:

- different lines of business
    - age group (as well as 18–24s, could also sell to 25–45s, 45–65s, over 65s
    - policy type (could sell both comprehensive and third-party policies)
    - gender (female, male)
    - number of lives covered (could sell both individual or family policies)
    - vehicle type (could cover not only cars but also motorcycles, vans etc).
- geographical location 
    - living in different areas
    - travelling to different areas
- reinsurance provider
- asset classes (eg bonds and cash)
- assets held within a class (eg corporate bonds issued by different companies)

#### Underwriting at proposal stage

Underwriting helps to reduce anti-selection.

Underwriting can help to identify risks for which special terms need to be quoted ...

... or which need to be declined, e.g. individuals with several previous claims.

Underwriting helps bring actual claim experience closer to that assumed when pricing.

Underwriting helps XYZ to classify risks into homogenous groups for which a standard premium can be charged.

XYZ can use a range of rating factors ...

... to ensure that all risks are rated fairly.

Financial underwriting helps reduce the risk of over insurance ...

... e.g. the insurance amount for a three-year-old car exceeding the cost of a new car.


#### Claims controls

Claims control systems help to mitigate the consequences of a financial risk that has occurred.

Effective claims control helps guards against fraudulent or excessive claims.

The cost of the claims control system must be in proportion to its benefit ...

... so that the costs of investigating the claim are low relative to the reduction in claims cost.

A no claims discount system could be used or an excess introduced (if they are not already used).

Tighter policy wording could be used to reduce the incidence of claims ...

... e.g. a vehicle must be kept in a garage overnight.

#### Management controls

Management control systems include those for:

- data recording
    - Good quality data can help to reduce operational risks. 
- accounting and auditing
    - Effective accounting and auditing cannot change the risks accepted ...
    - ... but enables proper provisions to be established. 
- monitoring of liabilities
    - Monitoring liabilities can help protect XYZ against unacceptably high aggregations of risk ...
    - ... and help check that the business mix is as expected. 
- care over options and guarantees.
    - The experience of such guarantees can be fed back into pricing and underwriting ...
    - ... e.g. XYZ may guarantee that premiums will not rise by more than x% p.a. for loyal customers. 

### 1-iii.

*\[10\]*

*Set out possible reasons for the worsening of the funding position in the defined benefit scheme.*

#### Assumptions not as expected

**Investment return** lower than expected due to

- a change in asset allocation
- a poor performing fund manager
- a mismatch between assets and liabilities
- an inappropriate choice of assets

**Mortality** - people may live longer than expected

**Inflation** - may have been higher than expected ...

... leading the all of the following being higher

- guaranteed pension increases
- discretionary pension increases
- salary increases

**Other experience** may have been worse than expected e.g.

- scheme expenses may have been higher than expected
- more members may be married than expected
    - if scheme provides a dependent's pension

More members may exercise options on terms that give rise to a loss for the scheme, e.g. there may be more early retirements on more generous terms than expected.

Fewer members may exercise options than expected on terms that give a profit to the scheme e.g.:

- fewer members than expected transfer out of the scheme
- fewer members than expected take up cash at retirement.

Expenses may have been higher than expected, eg due to a special valuation required following closure of the scheme.


#### Benefit improvements

Members' past benefits may have been improved, e.g. due to sex equalisation

#### Contributions

Contributions paid over the period may have been lower than expected

#### Change in assumptions

The assumptions may have been made more prudent.

The scheme may have chosen to strengthen the assumptions ...

... or there may have been a regulatory requirement to strengthen the assumptions.

**Discount rate** - A lower discount rate may be used to reflect assets with lower expected returns ...

... or due to a change in market conditions over the period ...

... placing a higher value on the liabilities.

There may have been a change in the method used to set the discount rate ...

... e.g. moving from a single discount rate to a yield curve approach.

**Inflation** - A higher inflation assumption may be used to reflect higher inflation expectations (e.g. due to changing government policy).

**Mortality** - A stronger base table may have been used or greater allowance for improvements.

#### Other

Interest on existing deficit.

### 1-iv.

*\[8\]*

*Discuss potential options available to improve the funding position of the defined benefit scheme.*

#### Contributions

XYZ could increase payments into the scheme.

Payments may need to be made, given the deficit must be cleared within five years.

Consider when (e.g. immediately, gradually, all in five years) and how (e.g. on a contingent event).

XYZ could find the money to make contributions to the pension scheme by:

- having a rights issue
- selling a part of its business
- making redundancies
- increasing premiums on its insurance business
- asking ABC to contribute as part of the purchase.

#### Investment strategy

The scheme could invest in closer matching assets ...

... which would reduce the risk of the deficit worsening further, but may not give sufficient returns to reduce the current deficit.

The scheme could change its fund managers ...

... to improve returns and/or reduce fees.

The scheme could invest in assets with higher expected returns, which would be expected to reduce the deficit ...

... but may lead to a larger deficit if the assets underperform.

#### Expenses

Use fixed-fee agreements to reduce expense risk.

#### Assumptions

It may be possible to use weaker assumptions to place a lower value on the liabilities.

It may not be possible if:

- the assumptions used were already not very prudent
- regulation does not allow it or the basis is prescribed by regulation.

#### De-risking activity

Members could be given the option to change the form of the benefits to a form that reduces risk or cost, e.g.:

- to transfer from the DB to DC scheme
- to give up future pension increases for an uplifted level pension.

The scheme could purchase annuities with an insurer to remove the liabilities.

The scheme could purchase longevity swaps to reduce longevity risk.

#### Reducing benefits

It may be possible to remove any discretionary benefits or generous options.

#### Benefits

The scheme could ensure that any option factors are on a cost-neutral basis ...

... or on terms that are beneficial to the scheme.

The scheme could validate its data ...

... and review the scheme rules ...

... to ensure correct benefits are being paid and there is no overpayment of benefits.

### 1-v.

*\[7\]*

*Discuss the key risks of the defined contribution pension scheme. In your answer you should comment on each risk from the perspective of XYZ and the scheme members*

#### Contributions

Members

- Insufficient contributions made in the period up to retirement.

Sponsor

- XYZ may be required to pay more than expected
    - regulatory requirement
    - pressure from members if the benefits are lower than expected
    - losing staff if being out of line with market practice

#### Investments

Members

- Members bear the risk of inadequate investment returns
- Poor investment performance may mean the life insurer cannot afford to pay bonuses, so only the guaranteed return of 3% is met ...
- ... or in the extreme case the insurer is not able to pay the guaranteed return of 3%
- Members are likely to be concerned if returns do not keep pace with inflation. 

#### Expenses

Members

- there is a risk of high charges from the life insurer and this may be bourne by the members

Sponsor

- There is a risk of high charges from the life insurer and this may be bourne by XYZ

#### Admin

Members

- The quality of administration services may be poor and so:
    - members may not receive their benefits on time
    - contributions may not be invested correctly.

Sponsor

- If members receive poor service, then it reflects badly on XYZ's choice of life insurer. 

#### Benefits

Members

- members' retirement beneefits may be inadequate
- the life insurance comany may become insolvent
- Members may have to rely on other sources of income if benefits are low.
- If the life insurer fails, members may be concerned whether they will receive the funds they have accumulated so far.

Sponsor

- if life insurer fails, XYZ might be concerned that it needs to step in
- If the life insurer fails, this may cause problems for XYZ with its regulator.

#### Other

Operational risks may arise, eg due to fraud or poor governance.

External risks may arise, eg due to changes in regulation or tax.

## 2.

*LifeCo insurance company sells only immediate whole single life annuities and has total liabilities of £13bn. Currently LifeCo has £15bn of assets invested mainly in corporate bonds.*

*LifeCo is seeking to improve the risk adjusted investment returns from its assets by investing in long-term illiquid assets. Currently LifeCo directly manages all of its assets. LifeCo has proposed to invest up to £1bn in commercial mortgage loans.*

*Under a commercial mortgage loan money is lent to a special purpose company that owns one or more properties that provides collateral for the loan. The income after expenses produced by the one or more properties of the special purpose company funds the loan payments. Three examples of potential commercial mortgage loans are set out below:*

**Definately hard, little specific core reading**

**Identify topics that might be being tested.**

- **securitisation**
- **the control cycle**
- **the features of annuities, bonds, and property**
- **investment strategy**
- **risk**
- **stakeholders**
- **direct vs indirect investment**

### 2-i.

*Outline the project stages to evaluate the proposal to invest in commercial mortgage loans.*

---

Actuarial control cycle can be used.

- Specify the problem
- Develop the solution
- Monitor the experience

In the context of

- The external environment
- Professionalism

---

#### Specifying the problem

The actuary should ensure they have a clear of the brief before advising the client.

LifeCo will look to identify risks associated with investing in commercial mortgage loans.

The adviser needs to be clear on their responsibilities, eg the type of advice required.

#### Developing the solution

This will involve:

- analysing risk
- considering whether to accept the risk or to transfer and manage risk ...
- ... and the implications of doing so.
- considering the needs of all stakeholders
- determining an appropriate risk appetite
- considering whether a greater risk exposure is acceptable in the hope of extra returns
- communicating to the stakeholders responsible for decision making. 

#### Monitoring the experience

Feed back the experience from previous stages to better understand commercial mortgages and to clarify LifeCo’s risk appetite.

### 2-ii.

*Identify the risks for commercial mortgage loans in general.*

[Equity and property markets](09-equity-and-property-markets.md#property)

[Risk identification](25-risk-identification-and-classification.md#risk-categories)

PRIME property, CALL ST, and CBMLOE

---

CALL ST

- Comparables
- Age, condition, flexibility of usage
- Location
- Lease structure
- Size
- Tenant quality

---

CBMLOE

- Credit
- Business
- Market
- Liquidity
- Operational
- External

---

A commercial mortgage is an investment where the income produced by the property is used to pay interest ...

... and any repayment of principal during the loan.

Any outstanding principal is due to be repaid at the end of the loan period ...

... either from the proceeds of the property sale or from refinancing a further loan.

If either the interest or principal is not paid when due, then the underlying property provides security;

the level of security depends on the property’s value at that time.

The SPV may use other financial resources available to avoid a default on interest payments or principal repayments. 

#### Credit

There is a risk of poor financial strength of the SPV; consider their financial history.

There is a risk of a deterioration in credit rating, ie credit spreads.

There may be a lack of diversification between tenants, eg if T, V and W are in the same industry. 

There is a risk that it takes longer than expected to make recoveries if the loan defaults.

There is a risk that if mortgage payments increase, this increases the likelihood of default.

#### Market

There is a risk that the value of the loan is high relative to the value of the collateral, ie a high LTV.

There is a risk that rents are low relative to the loan interest repayment, ie a low debt service coverage ratio.

If rents do not increase as expected, this reduces debt coverage.

There are economic risks ...

... such as interest rate risk (as the cashflows, their present values, and underlying property prices may all be linked to interest rates).

There is a risk that lenders’ lending requirements become more stringent. 

#### Liquidity

There is the risk that the loans are illiquid or unmarketable should LifeCo wish to realise its investment ...

... given the investment is secured on underlying properties that can be illiquid or unmarketable ...

... so, on default, may need to sell below market price to accelerate a sale.

#### Business

**Specific to property.**

There is a risk that the underlying property is unattractive, and so offers poor collateral, eg:

- lack of comparables, or uniqueness, eg property with excessive restrictions obsolescence
- in a poor location, eg property (a) is in a small town the lease structure is unfavourable
- the property is large in size, so indivisible, eg property (b)
- the tenant is of poor quality, eg low credit rating and declining industry, eg tenant R
- the likelihood of a void is high ...
- ... as are the costs in case of void.
- The amount and timing of cashflows may not be as desired, eg monthly vs annually.
- Risks increase if the property is of poor quality, so there is less potential for redevelopment.
- Leasehold properties may offer lower quality collateral than freehold properties. 

#### Operational

Operational risks include:

- poorly drafted loan terms and conditions
- fraudulent activity within the SPV.


#### External

There could be changes in legislation affecting commercial property or mortgage lending.

There are external risks to the physical property used as collateral ...

... eg a flood, fire, hurricane, earthquake etc could reduce property values.

There may be political risk around property ...

... eg rent controls may limit the amount of rent received, reducing income cover for the loan. 

### 2-iii.

*Identify the stakeholders or other professionals that would need to be involved in reviewing the risks identified in part (ii), indicating the relevance of each.*

### 2-iv.

*Discuss the skills and experience required to invest in commercial mortgage loans, taking into account the stakeholders and other professionals in part (iii).*

### 2-v.

*Discuss the relative merits to LifeCo of using a third-party investment manager, compared to managing the investments directly.*

[Indirect investment](10-other-investment-classes.md#cis-vs-direct-investment)

### 2-vi.

*Assess the suitability of each of the three example commercial mortgage loans for inclusion in an investment portfolio to back LifeCo’s annuity liabilities.*


