
## 1

*A life insurance company has decided to launch a new product in a developing country (Country A) in which it has not operated before.*

*An actuary working for the life insurance company is carrying out an assessment of life expectancy in Country A for the purposes of projecting future liabilities.*

*The actuary is considering using past data from the country’s statistical authority as a basis for their initial work.*

*Outline the factors the actuary should take into account when using this data.*

[Data](18-data.md)

### Credibility

There needs to be a sufficient volume of data.

Need to consider how long the data has been collected for ...

... it may not be many years in a developing country.

### Completeness and quality

Need to consider whether the data is complete and ...

... whether and ...

... how to check for errors.

Need to ensure that all deaths have been included ...

... e.g. whether deaths in rural areas have been included.

Consider whether the data is detailed enough for the analysis ...

... e.g. includes the exposed to risk data as well as information on deaths.

### Relevance

Consider whether the data is relevant ...

... since it relates to the general population ...

... and therefore may not represent the insurer’s target market.

There may have been a change in the mix of homogeneous groups in the population.

Consider whether the past is likely to be a good indicator of the future ...

... for example, might expect to see increases in life expectancy ...

... which could be rapid in a developing country.

Adjustments will need to be made for expected future improvements.

Past data may include abnormal or random fluctuations.

## 2

*An established retail bank in a developed country has recently been losing market share. The bank is also facing rising costs from increased rents of its branches and staff salaries.*

*The bank’s Board has decided to become an internet only bank, offering all services online to its retail customers with no physical branches.*

### 2-i

*List the stakeholders who might be affected by such a change.*

- customers
- shareholders
- employees
- competitors
- landlords
- regulators / State

### 2-ii

*The Board of the bank believes that the reduction in costs should increase future profitability and the new model will attract new customers.*

*Describe the risks that might negatively impact the bank’s plans.*

[Risk](risk.md)

#### Customers

Some customers who prefer to use physical branches may leave.

It may be that the customers leaving are older customers ...

... who have larger amounts to invest than average.

Customers who live in rural areas with poor internet connectivity may not be able to stay with the bank.

It may be difficult to attract new customers ...

... as there are no branches to market to them.

The new customers who join may only buy the less profitable products ...

... e.g. take advantage of free current accounts but not take out loans ...

... as they would prefer to use a physical branch for those products.

#### Competitors

If the venture proved a success ...

... then other banks might also make this move and be more successful at it.

Existing online banks may be better at offering products online ...

... and such banks may have a better brand name.

#### Shareholders

There may be insufficient capital in the business to undertake this venture.

The shareholders may not approve of the change in business model ...

... making it difficult to raise funds via a rights issue.

#### Employees

It may be difficult to recruit the specialist IT staff that will be needed.

Operational risk arises if staff training on the new system and processes is inadequate.

The redundancy costs for existing staff may be higher than expected.

Some key existing staff may leave ...

... leading to a lack of knowledge within the business.

Reputational risk arises if customer service is poor due to poorly trained staff. 

#### Regulators

The regulator may not approve the move to becoming an internet only bank.

The regulator may not approve some of the products the bank wishes to sell.

The regulators may not approve the products as quickly as the bank would like.

The regulator may impose additional restrictions for the online business or higher capital requirements. 

#### Landlords

It may not be possible to exit the leases immediately ...

... or to do so may incur a penalty.

#### Other risks

Operational risk may arise if the systems and processes introduced to run the online business prove inadequate.

Cyber risk may arise, e.g. the system could be hacked and data stolen.

#### State

Political risk may arise if the government does not approve of this change.

## 3

### 3-i

*State the principles of investment for a provider of benefits on future uncertain events.*

A provider should select investments that are appropriate to the:

- nature
- term
- currency, and
- uncertainty

of the liabilities, and

- the provider’s appetite for risk.

Subject to the above, the investments should also be selected so as to maximise the overall return on the assets, where overall return includes both income and capital.

### 3-ii

*A charity has both short-term and long-term assets. The charity’s fund managers are reviewing their investment strategy.*

*Outline why the charity may need to review the appropriateness of its investment strategy.*

#### Liabilities

The charity’s liabilities may have changed ...

... e.g. more short-term assets required for disaster relief efforts.

The charity’s objectives may have changed ...

... impacting on the future expected liabilities.

#### Financial position

There may have been a change to the level of free assets held ...

... or the cashflow position may have changed ...

... e.g. fewer donations received in the year.

#### Risk appetite

The charity’s risk appetite may have changed.

#### Investment performance

The current investment strategy may have produced low returns compared with the benchmark.

#### External factors

The economic environment may be changing ...

... e.g. moving into a recession.

Regulation may require that a review is carried out.

### 3-iii

*The charity’s long-term assets are invested in an ethical equity fund and an ethical corporate bond fund. The performance of these two funds has been measured and the returns appear to be lower than those of similar funds.*

*Suggest why the performance of the ethical funds might be out of line with similar funds.*

**Compared to similar funds** not vs funds not focussed on ethical investments.

#### Strategies and objectives

The objectives of the other ethical funds may be different.

This will lead to different investment strategies and therefore different returns.

#### Constraints

The other funds may be subject to different constraints, eg:

- how stringent the definition of "ethical" is
- appetite for risk.

The timing of investment and disinvestment may have been unfortunate, eg if the charity disinvested funds just before the funds rose in value.

The other ethical funds may be subject to different constraints, eg:

- ability to invest overseas ...

    ... and therefore exposure to currency risk

- ability to use derivatives
- different fund sizes leading to different investment opportunities.

#### Performance

The charges on this charity’s ethical funds may be higher, reducing the net return.

The investment managers of this charity’s ethical funds may have made poor investment choices.

#### Measurement

Different methods of measurement may have been used by the funds, eg time-weighted rate of return vs money-weighted rate of return. 

## 4

*Discuss why an insurance company may not pay a terminal bonus on one or more of its with-profits products.*

[With-profit contracts](06-life-insurance-products.md#with-profit-participating-contracts)

### Company unable to pay

The company may not have any surplus to distribute, which could be due to

- poor investment return
- adverse mortality experience
- failure of a third party, e.g. reinsurer
- high level of new business strain
- the need to cross-subsidise other business lines.

The company may be experiencing solvency difficulties. 

This could affect all of the with-profit products sold.

There would usually though be surplus held back from earlier years to enable smoothing ...

... and therefore a bonus to still be paid ...

... so it is only likely that this would lead to no terminal bonus if the poor experience was for a sustained period of time.

A surplus may have arisen ...

... but it is not expected to be sustainable to provide a terminal bonus in the longer term ...

... and need to take this into account now ...

... so that benefits are not being increased to reflect the current surplus.

This is likely to affect all lines of business sold.

If terminal bonus is not paid then more money is retained for other stakeholders, e.g. shareholders or executives ...

... assuming that profits do not need to be shared in a set way between stakeholders. 

### Company unwilling to pay

The company may wish to use the surplus in the with-profit fund for other uses, e.g.

- to design and launch new products
- to provide margins against future adverse experience
- to improve the capital position.

Not distributing bonus may though lead to dissatisfied policyholders ...

... who will expect some bonus ...

... although not necessarily the entire surplus to be distributed.

Other insurers may be paying a terminal bonus ...

... but the company is not concerned about its competitive position, e.g. ...

... if looking to exit the market. 

### Company not expected to pay

The company may have chosen an approach that does not require a terminal bonus, e.g. higher regular bonuses.

The benefits promised so far (the original guaranteed sum assured and regular bonuses declared) may already exceed the asset share.

Other insurers may not be paying a terminal bonus.

Regular bonuses may be given at such a level that a terminal bonus is not needed ...

... e.g. certain lines of business where the investments held give predictable returns ...

... so there is no need to hold back distribution of surplus until the end of the policy.

Regular bonuses may have been set at too high a level ...

... or the guaranteed sum assured at outset may have been too generous.

### Approach to determining terminal bonus

Terminal bonus is usually paid to ensure the payout reflects the asset share ...

... but subject to the company having some discretion to withhold some distribution ...

... to enable the smoothing of bonuses over time.

Normally, bonuses will be awarded where possible in line with policyholder expectations ...

... which will be affected by the policy literature and past practice.


## 5

Capital [requirements](36-capital-requirements.md) and [management](35-capital-management.md)

### 5-i

*Describe why the Economic Capital requirements of a company may be lower than its solvency capital requirements.*

The solvency capital requirement SCR is the target level of capital below which the insurer may need to discuss remedies with the regulator.

The economic capital requirement is the capital the insurer determines it needs given its assets, liabilities and business objectives.

The regulator may be more cautious in its assessment ...

... and require a higher level of capital to be held than the insurer might choose.

The regulator may base the assessment on an average company with an average risk profile ...

... but this insurer and the business it writes may be less risky than average.

The regulator may not allow for any benefits of diversification or hedging ...

... which might otherwise significantly reduce capital requirements, e.g. ...

... if the insurer writes annuity and whole life assurance business then there is a mortality offset.

The economic capital assessment may use best estimate assumptions ...

... whereas the assumptions for the regulatory capital assessment may be more prudent.

The approach to valuing assets may differ between the two capital assessments e.g. ...

some of the assets may be inadmissible i.e. ...

... cannot be included when assessing the regulatory capital position.


### 5-ii

*Describe how the company could use capital management tools to reduce the capital requirement in the future.*

[Capital management](35-capital-management.md#capital-management-tools)

**Reduce required capital in future** rather than access to funds for liquidity management purposes.

---

#### Reinsurance

Reinsurance can be used ...

... for example, an excess of loss arrangement to cap claims ... 

... and therefore reduce the amount of required capital.

#### Financial reinsurance

Financial reinsurance can be used ...

... which usually aims to improve the company's capital position by exploiting some form of regulatory arbitrage ...

... for example, by providing a loan which is repayable only if profits are made.

#### Securitisation

Securitisation can be used to convert the illiquid future profit stream ...

... which may not be recognisable as an asset on the regulatory balance sheet ...

... into a recognisable asset which, together with some element of risk transfer, reduces capital needs.

The effectiveness of tools such as financial reinsurance and securitisation will depend on whether the regulatory capital assessment already allows for future profits as an asset.

If it does, then their effectiveness is limited.

#### Derivatives

Derivatives can be used ...

... e.g. to protect against a fall in the value of the insurer's investments.

Some upside risk could be sold via a second derivative contract to meet part of the cost of the first derivative ...

... and capital requirements may reduce overall.

Longevity swaps could be used to reduce longevity exposure.

#### Subordinated debt finance

Debt finance could be rearranged to reduce the cost of finance.

If subordinated debt, the amount raised can be included as an asset, but the repayments need not be included as a liability, improving the balance sheet.

#### Internal approaches

The investment strategy could be changed to a better matched strategy ...

... which may reduce capital requirements as there is less market risk (or less need for a mismatching reserve).

The business could be restructured, e.g. funds merged.

This may reduce capital requirements if there is a requirement to hold a minimum amount of capital for each fund.

The insurer may consider selling into other product lines to offset the exposure to longevity risk e.g. ...

... hedge the risk by selling products that pay out on death.

### 5-iii

*An insurance company writes only immediate annuity business. Over the last year it has seen its liabilities, calculated on a best-estimate basis, reduce by 20%. However, over the same period its solvency capital requirements have increased by 20%.*

*Discuss possible reasons for these changes in liabilities and solvency capital requirements.*

#### Why the best-estimate value has fallen

There may have been a significant number of deaths over the year ...

... directly reducing the value of liabilities held (for in-force policies).

There may have been a change in the mortality assumptions (i.e. assuming heavier mortality) ...

... reducing the liabilities.

The company may have moved to a more aggressive investment strategy expected to give higher returns ...

... and therefore used a higher discount rate ...

... which places a lower value on the liabilities.

The best-estimate value of the liabilities will fall if:

- experience over the year results in a fall in the volume of in-force business
- the assumptions have changed, with year-end expectations of future experience being more optimistic than they were at the start of the year.

A change might be made to the base mortality table or the rate of mortality improvements applied to the base table.

There might be a reduction in assumed future renewal expenses and/or expense inflation.

It is not expected that any one of these areas would in isolation explain a 20% change. 

#### Why the capital requirements have increased

The rules around capital requirements may not move in line with the changes to the best-estimate liability calculation.

The regulator may have reviewed all assumptions used for the best-estimate liability valuation ...

... and decided they are more risky ...

... so required the company to hold a higher amount of additional required capital.

The regulator has identified new risks against which capital should be held.

The insurer may have reviewed its approach to modelling e.g. ...

... moved from using the standard formula to an internal model ...

... and this has suggested a higher level of required capital.

The regulator may believe that any increase in mortality will be reversed ...

... and in the long term expects even greater increases to longevity ...

... so more capital will be needed.

Any change to reward-seeking assets may be viewed by the regulator as meaning riskier assets are being held ...

... and therefore more capital is required.

#### General points

Errors may have been made in the calculations or in their presentation. 

## 6

*A developed country has introduced legislation which requires the following for corporate governance of boards of insurance companies:*

- *separation of roles of chairman, chief executive, finance director and chief risk officer*
- *the majority of the board to consist of non-executive directors*
- *a director representing employees and pensioners*
- *a minimum of 40% of directors to be male*
- *a minimum of 40% of directors to be female*
- *the regulator must approve all board and senior management appointments.*

*Discuss the appropriateness of the new legislation from the perspective of the main stakeholders.*

### General aims of regulation

The government will use regulation to help ensure the insurance market operates in an efficient and orderly manner, providing protection for policyholders.

Policyholders need to be confident in the operation of insurers to help ensure financial stability for the economy.

The role of implementation of the legislation is delegated to the regulator.

The regulator needs to develop, implement and oversee the regulation.

The regulator will seek to ensure that:

- business is undertaken in a prudent manner
- insurers act with integrity.

### Separation of roles of chairman, chief executive, finance director and chief risk officer

These are the four key roles within the insurance company ...

... and separating these roles ensures that the individual undertaking a role has sufficient time to devote to it.

It is sensible for a medium or large insurer to separate these roles ...

... and it should be possible to justify setting up a full-time position for each one.

However, this may not be practical for a small insurer ...

... where these roles might have been better combined.

If these roles were combined, then dominance risk may arise with a lack of oversight of the decisions made.

Separating these roles leads to greater accountability. 

### Majority of the Board to consist of non-executive directors

The non-executive directors will not be involved in the day-to-day operation of the business ...

... and can be expected to be impartial.

The non-executive directors can act in the interest of key stakeholders, e.g. shareholders ...

... and the policyholders.

As they are the majority of the Board, they can:

- collectively outvote the executive directors
- effectively challenge the executive directors.

Executive directors may operate in a more appropriate way because of this oversight.

It is unlikely to be practical for the regulator to oversee all aspects of regulation ...

... hence some of the responsibility may be passed to the Board of the insurer. 

### A director representing employees and pensioners

All directors should take a responsibility for the key stakeholders ...

... which includes the employees and pensioners ...

... but if that is not the case then it is a good idea that a director focuses on their interests.

Employees and pensioners will be pleased to have their views represented at Board level.

### Minimum of 40% of directors to be male / minimum of 40% of directors to be female

The suggested split by gender helps ensure diversity of the Board ...

... and can lead to cultural change within the insurer ...

... and the introduction of new ideas / fresh perspective.

Although a good longer-term goal, such a restriction may cause short-term problems or a skills shortage ...

... for example, if several directors of one gender need to be removed from the Board ...

... with the subsequent loss of experience.

The Board as a whole must have a sufficient level of competence.

The split may help ensure a better balance in considering the views of other stakeholders.

How difficult the regulation will be to implement will depend upon the current gender diversity on the Board ...

... it may need to be phased in. 

### Regulatory approval of Board and senior management appointments

This regulation can help ensure that individuals in positions of power are competent ...

... and act with integrity ...

... and will provide the appropriate oversight of the business.

The regulator may feel it is reasonable that it has a veto on clearly inappropriate appointments.

The insurer could judge competence by considering an individual’s professional qualifications ...

... but these qualifications may have been obtained at some time in the past.

The regulator can consider the level of competence at the time of appointment ...

... as well as whether past qualifications are genuine.

The regulator can also ensure that there is collectively sufficient competence and integrity across the Board.

## 7

### 7-i

*Outline the main factors that influence a financial institution’s long-term investment strategy.*

[Factors influencing an institution's investment strategy](14-choosing-an-appropriate-investment-strategy.md#factors-influencing-an-institutions-investment-strategy)

SOUNDER TRACTORS

The principal aim is to meet the liabilities as they fall due ...

... and invest taking an acceptable level of risk.

The institution should consider its objectives.

The institution should consider the expected long-term returns from different asset classes.

The institution should choose investments that are in line with its risk appetite.

The institution’s chosen strategy may wish to closely match its liabilities by:

- nature
- currency
- term
- uncertainty of amount and timing.

The institution needs to consider any investment restrictions ...

... e.g. due to regulation.

The institution will consider the size of the assets in absolute terms and the level of free assets.

The institution will consider the need for diversification between and within asset classes.

The institution should consider the tax treatment of investments ...

... and of the institutional investor ...

... as this will influence the preference for income vs capital gains.

The institution should consider its cashflow needs ...

... if low, consider assets that provide most of their return through capital growth rather than income ...

... whereas if significant income is needed ...

... the institution may prefer liquid assets and assets that give most of their return through income.

The institution should consider the impact on solvency or accounting requirements.

The institution will consider the strategy adopted by competitors.

The institution should consider whether it will continue to accrue further liabilities.

### 7-ii

*The board of a university located in a particular city are concerned about the shortage of accommodation available for students. To address this, the board has proposed the construction of a new building which will accommodate approximately 200 students. The new building will be funded by private investors, whose funds will finance the construction and ongoing maintenance of the new building.*

*Outline reasons why private investors would want to invest in the new building.*

[Factors influencing an individual's investment strategy](14-choosing-an-appropriate-investment-strategy.md#factors-influencing-an-individuals-investment-strategy)

#### Matching

This asset gives a long-term return ...

... which will be a good match if the investor has long-term liabilities.

The investor may have regular outgo that is real in nature ...

... and this would be well matched ...

... by the income stream from the rent on the property.

#### Return

The investment may offer a higher expected return than other comparable investments.

#### Risk

This investment may give good diversification from investors’ other assets.

### 7-iii

*Contrast how the following potential investors would evaluate this proposal:*

#### Size of the investment

The individual will have a smaller amount of money to invest ...

... whereas this investment is likely to form a larger proportion of the individual’s portfolio.

The individual is likely to need to pool funds with other investors to be able to access the investment.

The DB scheme may choose to invest a larger amount in the project.

#### Nature of liabilities

The liabilities for both investors are likely to be real ...

... but may be linked to different indices e.g. ...

... the DB scheme may have salary-linked liabilities.

#### Expertise

The DB scheme would usually be expected to have access to a greater level of investment expertise than an individual.

#### Expenses

The individual has a smaller fund over which to spread the fixed costs of investment.

#### Tax and regulation

The tax treatment of this asset for each investor may differ.

The DB scheme may have additional regulation that affects its investment choices.

#### Risk tolerance

Individuals are less likely to be able to accept risk.

Individuals may be more risk averse ...

... so make greater use of insurance to mitigate against some of the risks.

The DB scheme may be better placed to self insure risks.

#### Importance of liquid / marketable assets

If there are short-term variations in the market price of the asset ...

... this may be more of a risk for the individual than the scheme ...

... as the individual may have less certain outgo ...

... and therefore need liquid and marketable assets.

An individual may be more concerned about being able to see the asset quickly at a predictable price ...

... as may have less certain liabilities.

### 7-iv

*An alternative proposal being considered by the board is to encourage individual investors to purchase houses in the city to rent out to university students.*

*Assess how this alternative proposal addresses the accommodation shortage.*

## 8

*An insurance company only writes term assurance contracts. The company has been monitoring its mortality experience for many years.*

Term assurance provides a benefit on death provided it occurs within the date. Do not normally have any benefit on withdrawal.

### 8-i

*Describe the reasons for monitoring the mortality experience of these contracts. [4]*

[Monitoring](38-monitoring.md#reasons-for-monitoring-experience)

Monitoring the experience is a fundamental part of the actuarial control cycle.

The experience will be monitored to

- Update the method and assumptions so that they are more relevant to future experience
- Monitor any trends in experience, particularly adverse, to take corrective actions
- Provide management (and other key stakeholder) information

Monitoring can help in:

- updating assumptions
- updating methods ...
- ... to more closely reflect expected future experience.

Trends can be monitored ...

... particularly adverse trends ...

... such as increasing mortality rates ...

... leading to more claims within the term ...

... so corrective action can be taken ...

... eg tighten underwriting procedures.

Monitoring provides information to management ...

... and other key stakeholders.

Mortality experience is key for term assurance business ... ...

... because term assurance contracts only pay a benefit on death within the term ...

... so if experience is worse than expected ...

... it is important that adjustments are made to pricing and reserving.

Mortality experience will be monitored to check the approach to reserving ...

... i.e. that both the method and assumptions used are appropriate.

Monitoring experience can enable the insurer to compare its experience against others e.g. ...

... industry and reinsurer data.

The insurer will want to monitor experience to improve underwriting standards ...

... and /or negotiate lower reinsurance premiums.

### 8-ii

*The mortality experience analysis has shown that the company has been underestimating the actual number of deaths that occurred over the last three years.*

*Discuss the reasons why the mortality experience may have been heavier than expected.*

[Mortality](20-mortality-and-morbidity.md#factors-contributing-to-variations-in-mortality-and-morbidity)

#### General points

The mix of business may not have been as expected ...

... which could cause adverse experience if there were cross-subsidies in the pricing basis.

There may have been an epidemic causing a spike in deaths ...

... although this would not explain a trend.

Mortality varies by:

- geographical area
- social class.

There may have been:

- changes in the healthcare system
- error in setting the assumptions
- random fluctuations.

The underlying factors affecting mortality are:

- occupation
- nutrition
- housing
- climate / geography
- education
- genetics. 

#### Occupation

Increased unemployment of policyholders ...

... who continue to pay premiums despite unemployment ...

... can have a negative impact on life expectancy.

Some forms of employment are naturally hazardous e.g. ...

... mining work or work that involves using hazardous chemicals ...

... and this increases mortality rates.

Occupation also largely determines income level ...

... which affects lifestyle, housing and access to healthcare.

#### Nutrition

Poor nutrition has a short-term influence on morbidity and longer term influence on mortality.

Poor nutrition increases mortality rates ...

... as it increases the likelihood of certain diseases ...

... and impacts the speed of recovery.

A change in nutritional habits may lead to changing mortality. 

#### Climate / geography

Certain locations are more prone to natural disasters ...

... increasing mortality rates.

Certain locations may be subject to higher mortality rates, e.g. due to tropical diseases.

#### Education

A good level of education increases awareness of how to adopt a healthy lifestyle ...

... and reduces mortality rates ...

... as it affects the choices made, for example, in terms of diet and alcohol consumption.

There could have been changes in education policy that have affected policyholders.

#### Housing

Poor quality housing can lead to increased mortality rates due to:

- physical dangers
- overcrowding and therefore infection.

There could have been a change in the quality of housing affecting policyholders. 

### 8-iii

*Describe how the results of this analysis could be used.*

### 8-iv

*The company’s mortality analysis team has raised concerns around selection in relation to these policies.*

*Suggest possible reasons for the selection occurring in these policies.*

Underwriting at proposal stage insufficient ...

... medical underwriting in particular.

Rating factors insufficient to properly rate the risk of policy holders ...

... e.g. not distinguishing between smokers and non-smokers ...

... so they are charged the same premium ...

... and smokers are undercharged while non-smokers are undercharged.

More smokers will buy term assurance contracts from the insurer.
