## 1

*Explain the importance of mortality convergence [2]*

For the working-age population ...

... variations in mortality are observed reflecting key factors such as occupation ...

... and these variations can be large.

However, this variation reduces at much older ages.

This convergence across subgroups at much older ages is mortality convergence.

The variations observed at working ages can have a material financial impact on insurance companies.

The variations continue in the early years after retirement.

The apparent convergence observed at much older ages may lack credibility, given there is little data.

## 2

*Outline why risk reporting is important for the management of a financial institution. [4]*

[Risk reporting](28-risk-measurement-and-reporting.md#risk-reporting)

Regular risk reporting is important so that:

- new risks can be identified
- management understands the risk exposure ... 

    ... for example, the likely impact of each risk ...

    ... and the interaction between risks

- management can determine how to deal with the risks ...

    ... such that risks are successfully controlled

- products can be appropriately priced
- appropriate reserves and capital can be determined.
- to assess whether risks are changing
- to check that the risk controls that have been implemented are effective
- to increase the confidence of investors in the business, eg shareholders ...

    ... so it is then easier and cheaper to raise capital.

## 3

### 3-i

*Define systematic and diversifiable risk [2]*

Systematic risk affects and entire market or financial system and not just specific particpants and cannot be diversified away.

Diversifiable risk arises from individual component of a market or financial system and can be diversified away.

### 3-ii

*Describe why a manufacturing company may decide to offer only a single product, rather than a diversified product range. [6]*

#### Company’s motivation

The company might not be acting in a rational way ...

... for example, it may have a focus which is not primarily on risk control and maximising return.

#### Returns from the single product

The company may believe the benefit of diversifying away such risks ...

... is outweighed by the single product providing very high returns.

#### Problems arising from offering many products

The costs of developing and offering a wide product range may outweigh the benefits.

For example, there may be competitive pressures in offering other products.

The company may not have the expertise to offer alternative products.

#### Acceptance of the risk

The company may have a high risk tolerance, so it can accept the risk from this lack of diversification ...

... eg if the company has sufficient capital to withstand the potential volatility that comes from offering one product. 

## 4

*An insurance company sells long-term care products in two countries. These countries are both developed and have similar population sizes.*

*The theoretical value of the benefits provided by the products is the same in both countries. The premiums charged are, however, very different.*

*Discuss possible reasons for the difference in premiums. [8]*

[Pricing and finance](23-pricing-and-finance.md)

### Cost

Value of premiums = theoretical value of benefits + expenses + profit and other loadings

Investment income is allowed for when calculating the present value of the benefits and may differ between the two countries.

The loadings may differ across the two countries, eg in relation to:

- tax
- commission
- levels of uncertainty relating to claims, and therefore different contingency margin
- reinsurance premiums and recoveries.

The insurer may set one of the premiums to only cover the marginal costs of sale ...

... in order to reduce the premium and increase market share.

### Price

The price that can actually be charged may be different in the two markets, eg:

- one country may have a more competitive market, meaning a lower premium needs to be charged
- the size of the markets may differ and therefore there are different opportunities to achieve economies of scale and so spread the fixed expenses across policies
- affordability may differ between the two countries and this is reflected in the premium.
- regulation and the solvency test may differ between the two countries
- a captive market exists that is not particularly price sensitive in one of the countries
- there are cultural differences between the two countries ...

    ... eg greater care within the family home in one country, therefore reducing demand for the product and the amount that can be charged

- the product may be sold as a loss leader in one of the countries, so policyholders also buy other more profitable contracts.

## 5

[Capital management](35-capital-management.md#providers-of-financial-services-products)

### 5-i

*Outline why a company needs capital [3]*

[Capital management](35-capital-management.md#companies)

### 5-ii

*ABC is a mutual insurance company specialising in providing life cover to the over 50s. ABC has just decided to expand its product range, and is about to launch a mortgage protection product.*

*Suggest possible reasons why ABC could require additional capital.[4]*

**NB: *additional* capital** so REG CUSHION but in particular;

- unexpected events, eg cushion against adverse experience
- regulatory requirement to demonstrate solvency
- expenses of launching a new product
- new business strain financing.

---

#### Cushion against adverse experience

ABC will be offering life cover, an area it has experience in ...

... but the new policies will have a different target market.

In particular, as it is life cover for a mortgage, the policyholders are likely to be younger ...

... and ABC may lack mortality data on this age group.

ABC may therefore hold additional capital to reflect the lack of data.

There may be uncertainty relating to other assumptions as well as mortality ...

... eg expense allowances and business volumes.

More capital may be required to reflect additional operational risk. 

#### Expenses of launching a new product

Systems will need to be developed to administer the policies.

The company may need to sell these policies in a different way ...

... eg through a relationship with a bank ...

... and this may require additional capital.

New premises may be needed for the staff managing this product.

#### New business strain

New business strain will arise for every new policy sold.

#### Regulatory requirement to demonstrate solvency

The solvency requirements may be more stringent for this new product. 

### 5-iii

*Propose, with reasons, possible actions ABC could take to improve their capital position. [4]*

[Capital management tools](35-capital-management.md#capital-management-tools)

but not

- equity financing because mutual (unless de-mutualise)
- deferring dividends to shareholders

## 6

### 6-i

*Outline the reasons for underwriting an insurance risk. [4]*

[Underwriting at the proposal stage](30-other-risk-controls.md#underwriting-at-the-proposal-stage)

The aim of underwriting is to divide lives into homogeneous groups.

It identifies the standard lives who will receive standard terms ...

... and the substandard lives who require special terms ...

... and what those special terms should be, eg a higher premium.

Underwriting helps ensure that the appropriate premium is charged for each risk.

It protects the insurer against anti-selection.

Financial underwriting can help protect against the risk of over-insurance.

Underwriting may also be carried out at the claims stage ...

... for example, to check that the claim is not fraudulent.

Underwriting will help the insurer understand if a risk should be accepted ...

... and understand the risks it currently covers.

Underwriting helps ensure that claims experience does not depart significantly from the experience assumed when pricing the product.

Initial underwriting can protect the insurer from the risk of fraud.

A reinsurer may require that a certain level of underwriting is carried out to control claims. 

---

Assess potential risks so that each can be charged an appropriate premium.

- Protect a provider from anti-selection
- Enable a provider to classify risks into homogeneous groups for which a standard premium can be charged and help to ensure that all risks are rated fairly
- Enables a provider to identify risks for which special terms need to be quoted
- For substantial risks, the underwriting process identifies the most suitable approach and level for the special terms to be offered
- For larger proposals, it will help to reduce the risk from over-insurance

The evidence needs to be interpreted by specialist underwriters.

Special terms may then be applied where the applicant is non-standard

- Addition to premium
- Reduction to benefit
- Exclusion cause
- Decline the applicant (temporarily or permanently)

### 6-ii

*A life insurance company in Country A has so far offered products only to its own domestic market. Country A is a well-developed country. The company is about to start selling a new term assurance product in Country B. Country B is a remote under-developed country. The company is considering the underwriting processes it will apply in Country B.*

*Explain ways in which the company's underwriting processes for Country B might need to be modified compared with its existing approach in Country A. (Details of how to price the business are not required.) [8]*

#### Initial underwriting

As a term assurance policy only pays out on death in the term, higher than expected mortality is the key risk.

Adjustments will need to be made to the underwriting process where there is the risk of mortality being underestimated in Country B.

Different information may need to be obtained to understand the mortality risk ...

... and therefore the costs of obtaining the necessary information may change.

The terms and conditions on the policy may need to be amended to reflect the different market.

The policies sold in Country B may have a lower average sum assured ...

... and this may affect the amount of underwriting carried out compared with Country A. 

Proposal form

- The questions may need to be modified because it may be more difficult to obtain quality information in Country B.
- The questions may need to be modified to reflect the lower level of financial sophistication of the target market.
- The system used to collect the information may need to change ...

    ... eg if Country A used an online proposal form but there is limited internet access in Country B ...

    ... then the information may need to be collected face to face.

- A translation service may be needed if the information is in a different language.

Further medical underwriting

- It may be more difficult to access medical information in Country B, for example if:
    - there is no State healthcare system
    - doctors report in different ways to Country A.

Lifestyle underwriting

- Local expertise will also be needed to understand the culture and lifestyle of the population of Country B ...
- ... eg the prevalence of smoking and drug abuse ...
- ... and how that affects mortality relative to Country A.

Financial underwriting

- It may be more difficult to carry out financial underwriting ...
- ... for larger policies ...
- ... eg more difficult to carry out specialist medical tests ...
- ... and more difficult to assess an individual’s income
- eg if it is not fully declared for tax purposes. 

#### Regulation

There may be different restrictions on the information that can be collected about the policyholder ...

... eg whether gender can be used as a rating factor.

It will be important to understand the legal system overseas ...

... eg what actions the insurer can take if the policyholder deliberately withholds information ...

... such as whether the insurer can refuse to pay the claim. 

#### Claims control systems

Changes may need to be made to claims control systems ...

... as there may be a greater chance of fraudulent claims.

For example, if it is easy to fraudulently obtain a death certificate ...

... then additional claims investigators may be needed.

#### Practical issues

If different information is collected, then it will need to be interpreted ...

... eg specialist medical advisors with experience of Country B may be required ...

... to help understand diseases and conditions affecting the population.

It may be difficult to hire experienced staff in Country B.

The reinsurer may request different underwriting requirements across the two countries.

#### Competition

Consider competitors’ underwriting practices to ensure they are not too far out of line.

#### Claims control systems

More care may be needed to check claims are valid, eg:

- if a person can "disappear" in a remote area of Country B
- and then be declared dead if there is a corrupt culture.

A balance needs to be made between the costs and benefits of claims underwriting ...

... so the insurer may choose to investigate only certain claims, eg those that are very large.

## 7

*A large corporation has purchased a number of companies from different sectors of the economy of the country it operates in. Each company has a defined benefit pension scheme. The past mortality experience has varied significantly between each of the defined benefit pension schemes.*

### 7-i

*Outline the factors that could explain the differing mortality experience. [2]*

[Factors contributing to variations in mortality and morbidity](20-mortality-and-morbidity.md#factors-contributing-to-variations-in-mortality-and-morbidity)

Age and gender would be expected to have been used to divide the data.

Occupation is a factor ...

... since some occupations might give exposure to hazardous conditions or chemicals.

Education is a factor ...

... since a higher level of education is linked with better lifestyle choices. 

### 7-ii

*Describe the types of information that would be required to investigate the main factors affecting the mortality experience of a scheme. [7]*

As much information should be collected as possible to give credibility to the data ...

... as this will enable homogeneous groups to be formed which have sufficient data.

A detailed analysis will be needed to draw meaningful conclusions.

An exposed to risk analysis will be carried out.

Adjustments will need to be made for any exceptional experience in the past data. 

Medical

- age
- gender
- results of medical underwriting ...

    ... and family medical history

Lifestyle

- smoker status
- marital status
- location ...

    ... which can be found by looking at the address ...

    ... and can be used to assess proximity to medical facilities

- occupation ...
    
    ... eg whether staff, management or executive

- level of education ...
        
    ... which acts as a proxy for lifestyle choices

Financial

- current salary or pension ...

    ... as a proxy for lifestyle choices, access to good nutrition, and healthcare ...

    ... although only forms part of a member's income

### 7-iii

*The members of a scheme are allowed to move their accrued pension benefits out of the scheme. The scheme's actuary calculates a lump sum "Transfer Value" to be paid out by the scheme for this purpose.*

*Outline the issues of using the types of information in (ii) to calculate Transfer Values for a scheme. [3]*

A transfer value represents the present value of the pension that the member is giving up in the scheme.

The calculation will therefore need to take account of a member's likely future life expectancy ...

... as well as other important factors, eg salary.

---

Data quality

- Member data will be useful for calculating the transfer value if it is relevant ...
- ... and credible, so it does not lead to spurious conclusions.

Fairness

- Data should be up-to-date, eg reflects a member’s current role within the business ...
- ... such that the transfer value may be viewed as fair.

Regulation

- The approach to calculating the transfer value must adhere to regulation.

Costs

- There will be costs associated with collecting data and ensuring it is up-to-date. 

## 8

*A wealthy individual has a large cash lump sum. He has asked an actuary to advise on how he might invest this sum to provide for himself and his family in retirement, and to be able to leave an amount as an inheritance.*

### 8-i

*Describe how the actuary would assess the individual’s future liabilities. [4]*

[Choosing an appropriate investment strategy](14-choosing-an-appropriate-investment-strategy.md#factors-influencing-an-individuals-investment-strategy)

It will be important to understand the:

Amount

- target level of income in retirement
- desired amount to leave as an inheritance
- all other intended future outgo, including any debt to be serviced

Nature

- nature of the liabilities ...
- ... which are likely to be predominantly real

Term

- term of the liabilities ...
- ... which will reflect the individual’s age

Currency

- currency of the liabilities
- whether there are plans to retire abroad etc leading to overseas liabilities

Uncertainty

- potential for the liabilities changing over time
- individual's need for liquidity

It is also important to understand:

- the individual’s tax position ...

    ... and therefore preference for income over gains

- the individual’s risk appetite.

The actuary should find an appropriate way of gathering information ...

... for example, an interview with the individual. 

### 8-ii

*Identify four key risks, from the viewpoint of the individual, which the actuary should consider when giving their advice. [2]*

The individual’s life expectancy being different to expected.

A low rate of return being achieved on the investments.

A change in tax position, so the approach used is no longer as tax efficient.

High charges associated with investment reducing the net return.

The liabilities increasing in value relative to the assets, reducing net worth.

The assets not being sufficiently liquid so as to meet unexpected outgo.

The inheritance being less than expected.

### 8-iii

*Describe how each of the risks in (ii) might be mitigated. [6]*

Individual life expectancy longer than expected

- Purchase an annuity to protect against longevity in retirement.

Individual life expectancy shorter than expected

- Assess the individual’s health status ...
- ... and purchase protection products as necessary ...
- ... eg whole life assurance.

Low rate of return achieved on the investments

- Diversify the assets ...
- ... both across and within asset classes.

Tax inefficiency

- Take appropriate advice from a tax expert.
- Diversify assets between those with different tax status
- ie assets providing returns through income and growth.
- Choose assets that maximise the use of any tax breaks available.

High investment expenses

- Consider the use of collective investment schemes to achieve economies of scale. 

## 9

*A bank sells a special mortgage product to prospective borrowers aged over 70. The product provides a loan secured on the accumulated equity in the borrower’s home. The borrower does not need to make any cash payments to the bank on the amount borrowed. Interest is added to the loan balance every month; a fixed, non-reviewable rate of interest is charged. The loan balance (including accumulated interest) has to be repaid when the borrower dies, moves into long-term care or sells the property.*

### 9-i

*Describe the risks the bank is exposed to with this product. [6]*

[Risk identification and classification](25-risk-identification-and-classification.md#risk-categories)

#### Business risk

There is longevity risk for the bank...

... as if the borrower lives for a long time ...

... the sale of the house may not cover the initial loan and interest owed to the bank.

There is the risk of early repayment (eg due to death or ill health) ...

... so the bank has earned insufficient interest to cover the expenses of providing the product.

#### Operational risk

There is a risk that the bank is accused of mis-selling the product ...

... eg if high pressure selling techniques are used.

There is potential for reputational risk for the bank ...

... if it is seen to be exploiting a potentially vulnerable target market ...

... eg evicting other dependants living in the home when the borrower dies.

There are risks to the bank of poor management of data and the underwriting process.

#### Market risk

Interest rate rises will be a particular concern if the bank’s source of finance is at a variable rate.

Interest rates may rise ...

... but as the bank cannot change the rate on existing loans ...

... it may miss out on earning returns.

House prices may fall, so the bank recovers insufficient money to meet the loan and interest.

At the time of sale, a depressed property market may mean it takes the bank a long time to sell each property. 

#### External risk

There is the risk that competitors offer a more attractive product.

#### Liquidity risk

There is no repayment of interest during the term, which may cause the bank liquidity problems. 

### 9-ii

*Propose, with reasons, actions the bank could take to manage the risks identified in (i). [8]*

- [Risk transfer](29-risk-transfer.md)
- [Other risk controls](30-other-risk-controls.md)

#### Business risk

Impose borrowing limits on younger borrowers ...

... as if they live a long time then the loan and accrued interest may exceed the house value.

Take out longevity swaps that pay out if borrowers are living longer than expected. 

#### Operational risk

Reputational risk can be reduced by:

- requiring that the borrower take independent legal advice ...
- ... therefore reducing the risk that the product is mis-sold
- ensuring the terms and conditions are clear.

#### Market risk

Interest rate risks can be managed by changing the product to have a variable interest rate ...

... or a combination of an initial fixed rate and then reviewable in the future.

The risk of falls in house prices can be mitigated by;

- using derivatives based on house prices
- valuing the property at the outset on a long-term basis ...

    ... taking account of market movements over an economic cycle

- taking a pessimistic view of the value of the property ...

    ... reducing the risk that the sale value is insufficient to cover the loan

- imposing limits on loans relative to house values
- diversifying by location to reduce exposure to a fall in prices in a particular region
- requiring notification of the borrower’s death or moving into care to minimise delays in selling the property.

#### External risk

The risk of an uncompetitive product can be reduced by;

- researching what competitors offer
- checking whether the bank could offer other products giving a better return.

## 10

### 10-i

*Describe motor third-party liability insurance. [3]*

[Motor third party](07-general-insurance-products.md#motor-third-party-liability)

Motor third-party liability insurance indemnifies the owner of a motor vehicle against compensation payable to third parties ...

... covering the risks of death, personal injury or damage to their property.

In most countries such cover is compulsory ...

... with or without an upper limit on the amount of compensation. 

### 10-ii

*In a certain country, motor third-party liability insurance is not compulsory. Its government is proposing to provide motor third-party liability insurance to all motorists and pay for the related claims.*

*Suggest reasons for the government’s proposal. [3]*

[Objectives of government](05-benefits-and-providers-of-benefits.md#state)

#### Paternalism

The government may be paternalistic and want to protect all citizens ...

... as some motorists may drive without cover currently.

#### Fairness

Some motorists may not have the financial resources to meet any claims from third parties ...

... which would be unfair.

#### Political popularity

This may be a politically popular proposal.

#### Acceptable cost

The government may be able to provide cover at a lower cost than insurers ...

... as it does not need to include a margin for profit. 

### 10-iii

*Describe the areas where an actuary could provide advice to the government in relation to the proposal. [6]*

[Actuarial advice](01-actuarial-advice.md)

### 10-iv

*Discuss how stakeholders, other than the government, might be affected if the proposal was implemented. [5]*

#### Insurers

General insurance companies currently offering this cover will be affected as;

- they will sell fewer policies ...
- ... and so may have lower profits
- there may be a levy on insurers to pay for the benefit.

#### Motorists

Motorists will be affected as:

- their insurance premiums will fall
- they may be subject to additional levies on fuel or a higher fee for a vehicle licence, dependent upon how the benefit is funded.

#### General public

The general public may see an increase in taxes to pay for the benefit.

#### Regulator

The regulator who oversees the government may be affected ...

... as it will need to monitor the effectiveness of the scheme. 
