## 1

*An insurance company only sells house insurance and motor insurance products. The company invests the premiums received on its insurance business in cash and short-term loans. [2]*

### 1-i

*Explain why the company currently invests in cash and short-term loans.*

The timing and amount of claims will be uncertain ...

... and both of these assets provide the necessary liquidity so that claims can be paid as they arise.

These classes of business are short term in nature ...

... and both assets are short term and therefore a good match.

Liquidity is also needed to meet expenses.

Cash is the most liquid asset and is available immediately for urgent claims ...

... eg paying for a house to be pumped out immediately after a flood.

Short-term loans are also liquid and could be used to meet other claims ...

... eg replacement of non-essential contents stolen from a property.

Both assets are low risk, which may suit the insurer’s risk appetite.

Both assets have stable market values.

### 1-ii

*It has been argued that the company could increase profits significantly by investing the premiums on its insurance business in more risky assets.*

*Suggest, with reasons: [4]*

- *two assets that may be suitable assets for the company.*
- *two assets that would not be suitable assets for the company.*

#### Suitable

Consider longer-dated government and high-quality corporate bonds ...

... which are likely to offer a higher yield but should be marketable and still be quite liquid.

Consider high-quality equities ...

... which are likely to offer a higher return, without significant default risk, and are marketable.

#### Unsuitable

Direct property investment ...

... as it has very poor marketability, poor liquidity and high expenses.

Unlisted equity ...

... as it is likely to have high default risk and has poor marketability and poor liquidity.

## 2

*A bank in a developing country and a large international insurer have established a joint venture insurance company. The company’s first product will be a term assurance, sold by tied agents (ie sales people who only sell the products of one company) through the bank’s branches.*

*Describe how the Actuarial Control Cycle can be used in the pricing and ongoing financial management of the term assurance product. [8]*

!!! note

    It is important to use the key words in the question to produce an answer tailored to the scenario. For example:

    - "developing country" so there may be increased uncertainty and volatility
    - "large international, so there is experience of how to price and design a product
    - "joint venture" so both bank and insurer are stakeholders
    - "first product" sold, so there is a lack of expertise in offering to this particular market
    - "term assurance", so mortality risk is key
    - "sold by tied agents", so consider whether this is the best approach.

### General economic and commercial environment

It will be important to consider the wider external environment ...

... e.g. who the key competitors are, their products and prices.

Consider the regulations applying to pricing and reserving for this product.

### Specifying the problem

Measurable targets will need to be set, eg in relation to profit criteria and market share.

All the stakeholders will need to be identified ...

... eg the customers and the tied agents.

Risk will need to be identified ...

... eg mortality heavier than expected.

Risks will then be analysed.

As the product is new, the insurer may lack expertise in pricing the product for this market.

The initial problem is to design and price the new term assurance.

Examples of stakeholders include reinsurers and the regulator.

Examples of risks include:

- expenses greater than expected
- business volumes lower than expected
- inadequate underwriting.

### Developing the solution

Risks will need to be managed, mitigated or transferred.

A model will be required to price the product.

Assumptions will need to be set.

As this is term assurance, mortality is the key assumption.

Decisions will be made in relation to handling risks.

An analysis of various design options will be undertaken.

### Monitoring the experience

Actual experience will need to be reviewed against expectations.

For example, assessing the success of using tied agents as opposed to other sales channels.

The following areas will be monitored:

- mortality, which may vary significantly over time in a developing country ...

    ... and this mortality risk will sit entirely with the insurer if the contract is without-profit in nature.

- lapses
- business volumes
- performance relative to competitors.

### Professionalism

All work should be undertaken in a professional manner.

## 3

*A retail bank is planning to set up a new insurance subsidiary, located in a previously unoccupied floor in the bank’s head office.*

*Describe the types of expenses that the subsidiary would be expected to incur in its first 12 months. [8]*

[Expenses](21-expenses.md)

Fixed / variable

Initial / renewal / investment / terminal

---

The insurer will incur both fixed and variable expenses.

Fixed expenses are expenses that must be paid whether or not the business is profitable.

Variable expenses are expenses that change in line with sales or claims.

Some expenses remain broadly fixed in real terms ...

... whereas other expenses vary directly with the volume of business.

Some expenses are essentially fixed, but can vary in large amounts from time to time.

!!! note

    The initial set up costs will be largely fixed expenses. The ongoing expenses will be both fixed and variable.

### Initial start-up costs

The insurer will incur initial costs before it is in a position to sell policies.

For example, the costs of an investigation to assess whether the venture is feasible.

If it is feasible, there will be pre-launch costs ...

... e.g. training of staff and setting up systems.

Initial investigations will include market research and consultancy fees.

Some of the initial start-up costs will continue when the business starts to sell policies.

### Ongoing costs

These include fixed expenses relating to:

- rent for the building (may be a notional rent)
- utility costs, eg electricity
- staff salaries
- equipment, eg furniture and computers
- insurance cover for the insurer ...

    ... eg commercial buildings and contents
- pension scheme contributions
- building maintenance
- fees for advisors
- marketing
- technology
- finance repayments
- costs of regulatory approval and compliance.

These include variable expenses relating to:

- commission
- stationery
- policy administration
- investment
- policy termination

## 4

### 4-i

*Describe the four steps necessary to achieve an effective identification and analysis of the risks facing a project. [4]*

[Risk identification](25-risk-identification-and-classification.md#risk-identification)

*A savings product pays out a guaranteed lump sum to the beneficiary 2 years after purchase, in return for an initial single premium.*

### 4-ii

*List the reasons the company may not pay in full. [2]*

#### The company

The company may have become insolvent ...

... eg due to poor investment performance.

#### The customer

The customer submitted fraudulent details.

The customer may have died, and a lower amount is paid on death.

### 4-iii

*Outline the risks the beneficiary may face if the payment amount is not guaranteed. [2]*

The main risk is that the benefit will be less than the customer anticipated.

For example, returns may not have kept pace with inflation ...

... and therefore the customer's standard of living may be lower than expected.

The customer may be intending to use the proceeds for a particular purpose ...

... eg to buy a house or repay a loan ...

... and the lower benefit may not be sufficient to meet the cost.

## 5

*An insurance company writes marine insurance to protect shipping from losses in relation to acts of violence such as war or piracy. Due to increasing political tensions, such actions are becoming more common in one area of the world in which the company has a number of clients.*

### 5-i

*Describe, with specific examples, how the company can use risk control measures to mitigate exposure to the risks arising from these political tensions. [4]*

Underwriting at the proposal stage

- by asking potential clients where their ships will be travelling
    - from
    - to
    - through
- to limit exposure to those areas with increased risk of acts of violence.

Diversification

- by insuring risks in areas where there is lower political tension
- or diversifying across which particular regions with high political tension
    - such as off the coasts of Africa and South America
- reducing the risk of correlation between the risks

Management controls

- the company can closely monitor their liabilities
- and use this monitoring to feed back into underwriting decisions
- or special terms offered / reject certain policies

Claims controls

- require third-party evidence that any losses were a result of violent acts
- and not simply that a ship's captain had say fallen asleep at the wheel and hit some rocks.

Contract wording

- use tight contract wording
- to reduce the number of perils policyholders may try to claim are acts of violence.
- for example, the contract may specify that a ship must be boarded
- to qualify as an act of piracy.
- the contract may specify that alternative routes had been sought
- and the only solution was to travel through an area with high incidence of violent acts
- where the departure and destination port were not in "dangerous" areas.

---

Reduce the probability of a claim occurring

- Diversify to write more business in other areas.
- Refuse cover to the highest risk cases / areas.

Limiting the severity / consequences of a claim

- Place an upper limit on claims.
- Underwrite each risk carefully so it is fully understood ...

    ... and increase the premium where necessary to ensure it fully reflects the risk.

- Apply rigorous claims control standards.
- Use reinsurance ...

    ... to control the reputational risk by enabling claims to be settled swiftly.

### 5-ii

*Discuss how the company can use scenario analysis to predict and control future exposure to such risks. [4]*

[Scenario analysis](28-risk-measurement-and-reporting.md#scenario-analysis)

## 6

### 6-i

*Outline the reasons why an insurance company needs to calculate provisions. [3]*

[Provisions](31-provisions.md#reasons-for-provisions)

The reasons for calculating the provisions needed by a provider include the following:

- to determine the liabilities to be shown in the provider’s published accounts and reports
- if separate accounts and reports are prepared for the purpose of supervision of solvency, to determine the liabilities to be shown in those accounts
- to determine the liabilities to be shown in internal management accounts and reports of the provider
- to value the provider for merger or acquisition
- to determine the excess of assets over liabilities and whether any discretionary benefits can be awarded
- to set future contributions to a benefit scheme to value benefit improvements for a benefit scheme
- to calculate discontinuance / surrender benefits to influence investment strategy
- to provide disclosure information for beneficiaries.

### 6-ii

*One of the largest insurance companies located in a particular country has received an offer to be purchased by an overseas private equity firm.*

*Identify the different stakeholders involved in the proposed purchase, commenting for each how they might prefer the company’s provisions to be calculated. [6]*

This part is an application test on the appropriate basis for calculating provisions where an overseas equity firm is seeking to purchase a large insurance company.

We are asked to identify the stakeholders involved in the purchase and comment on their preferred basis for the calculations.

The first step is to identify a range of stakeholders, so it can be helpful to think about who has an interest in the takeover. We might identify the following internal and external stakeholders:

- the providers of capital (eg shareholders) of the insurer and private equity firm
- management
- policyholders
- employees
- advisers to the deal
- the regulator
- the government.

We can then consider the basis each group would prefer. The choices are:

- optimistic (i.e. a relatively low value placed on liabilities compared to assets, so the insurer will appear to have a relatively high level of free assets)
- best estimate, with an equal chance of overstating or understating the assets and liabilities
- prudent (ie a relatively high value placed on liabilities compared to assets, so the insurer will appear to have a relatively low level of free assets).

The results on a best-estimate basis are often valuable, given they provide a realistic picture of the financial position.

However, calculations are often made on other bases, dependent upon the purpose of the calculation, in this case a takeover.

---

#### Private equity firm shareholders

In terms of the negotiations, the private equity firm shareholders would have a preference for a prudent basis ...

... to reduce the purchase price.

!!! note

    A prudent basis will suggest a low level of free assets, so the purchaser will not have to pay as much to purchase the free assets of the insurer. This may seem counter intuitive, but effectively the private equity shareholders are paying to take on some of the liabilities and so do not want them to be understated.

However, they will also want to see the figures on a best-estimate basis ...

... so they can ensure they make the right decisions.

#### Current shareholders of the target insurer

The shareholders of the target insurer will want to see the figures on a best-estimate basis to understand true value.

In terms of the negotiations, they would have a preference for an optimistic basis ...

... to increase the purchase price.

#### Policyholders of the target insurer

Current policyholders will want to ensure that their benefits are secure.

They will therefore prefer a best-estimate or prudent basis that does not underestimate their liabilities.

#### Regulator(s)

The regulator(s) will want to ensure that policyholder benefits are secure ...

... and therefore have a preference for figures not being understated ...

... ie a preference for a best-estimate or prudent basis.

## 7

Capital [management](35-capital-management.md) and [requirements](36-capital-requirements.md)

*The insurance regulator in a country has noticed a significant deterioration in the capital strength of one of the insurance companies it supervises. The regulator has suggested that the insurance company works with a large bank to strengthen its financial position.*

### 7-i

*Describe the types of capital management solutions that the bank could offer the insurance company to achieve the regulator’s objective. [3]*

[Capital management tools](35-capital-management.md#capital-management-tools) ...

... but those that a bank might offer or be the intermediary for.

---

The bank can offer liquidity facilities, i.e. short-term financing, to aid the insurer with its current difficulties.

The bank could agree to a contingent capital arrangement, i.e. agree to provide finance in the future if there is a further worsening of the capital position.

The bank could offer senior unsecured financing. This involves the bank providing a loan to the insurer's parent company (if it has one) to be used to support the insurer.

The bank could act as a broker for reinsurance products.

The bank could advise on issuing subordinated debt or equity finance ...

... or in securitising future profits.

The bank may advise on cost-saving measures that the insurer could undertake, e.g. to cut expenses ...

... or provide guidance on profitable markets where the insurer might undertake business.

### 7-ii

*Describe how effective each solution might be in satisfying the regulator that the insurance company’s capital position had improved. [5]*

The effectiveness of any of the solutions will depend upon the particular regulatory regime.

#### Liquidity facilities

Liquidity facilities provide short-term finance to enable the insurer to sell more business and make more profit.

This will be an easy form of finance for the regulator to assess.

#### Contingent capital

This lacks visibility ...

... given finance is only provided once there is a deterioration in experience ...

... and therefore may be difficult for the regulator to assess.

The effectiveness will depend upon the financial strength of the bank that agrees to provide the additional finance.

#### Senior unsecured financing

This will not improve the financial strength of the group as a whole ...

... but if the regulator is considering the insurer in isolation it is effective at improving the capital position.

#### Reinsurance

The regulator will need to assess the strength of the reinsurer and the level and types of cover to understand its effectiveness.

#### Debt or securitisation

The regulator will need to understand fully the terms offered ...

... what level of future profits are being securitised and the long-term impact on the insurer.

*The insurance company is also considering moving from a standard formula approach to an internal model approach to improve its capital strength, subject to obtaining regulatory approval for this change.*

### 7-iii

*Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the insurance company moving to an internal model approach from the perspective of the insurance company. [3]*

[Internal model](36-capital-requirements.md#internal-models)

#### Advantages

The internal model can allow for the particular risks faced by this insurer ...

... whereas the standard model reflects risks for the average insurer in the industry.

The internal model may suggest a lower level of capital is required.

The insurer may be subject to risks that are not covered by the standard model ...

... and these risks can be included in the internal model.

The internal model can better allow for any diversification benefits enjoyed by the insurer.

The insurer can use assumptions that better reflect its business.

Approximations included in the standard model can be removed.

The insurer can model its own risks to increase its understanding of them.

#### Disadvantages

There will be a significant cost to creating and maintaining the model.

The insurer will need expertise (that it may lack) to create the model.

It may be time consuming to get regulatory approval for the model.

If the insurer is similar to the average insurer, there are limited benefits from creating an internal model.

It may only be appropriate for large insurers, due to the cost and expertise required.

It may be difficult to justify a lower capital requirement to the regulator ...

... the insurer may need to run both models.

It may be that an expected reduction in capital requirements does not materialise.

### 7-iv

*Outline the issues the insurance regulator is likely to consider before agreeing to this change. [3]*

#### Prudence

The regulator will want to ensure an appropriately prudent approach is taken, ie whether the:

- model allows more appropriately for the risks of the insurer than the standard model
- model suggests a level of capital that the regulator is happy with
- data used is credible
- assumptions used can be justified.

#### Consistency

The regulator will want to check how comparable the results would be with those of other insurers.

#### Confidence

The regulator will want confidence in the expertise of the insurer in carrying out the exercise.

## 8

[Modelling](17-modelling.md)

### 8-i

*Discuss the factors to be considered by an insurance company when deciding whether to use actual policy records or representative model points when using a financial model. [7]*

#### Purpose of the exercise

Actual data is likely to be used if modelling the liabilities for existing business.

If valuing new business, then it is likely that model points will be used.

The size and importance of the line of business should be considered ...

... i.e. use actual policy data for significant lines of business.

The use of actual policy data to assess potential future new business may lead to spurious accuracy.

If the product is brand new, it will be difficult to set model points.

#### Regulatory requirements

It may be a requirement of regulation to use actual data ...

... eg if calculating the provisions for statutory purposes.

#### Accuracy required

The data used will be dependent upon the level of accuracy required.

The use of model points will lead to a less accurate result.

If the results of the exercise are to be published ...

... then it is more likely actual data will be used.

If only an indicative result is needed, then the company is more likely to use model points.

#### Speed of results

Need to consider how quickly the results will be required.

It is likely to be quicker to use model points than actual data.

A large portfolio of actual policy data may take too much time to run.

The available computer power should be considered.

#### Practicalities

Need to consider whether full policy records are available.

Consider whether the actual policy data is in a format suitable for the model.

The model may not be set up to accept actual policy data.

It may be difficult to determine model points ...

... as the underlying business may comprise a very wide range of different policies ...

... which will be difficult to compile into appropriately homogeneous groups ...

... and judgement will be required, eg whether to differentiate by age, sum assured etc.

Formulating the model points incurs a cost and can be time consuming.

The groups formed need to be such that each policy in a group is expected to have similar results.

*An insurance company has recently completed a valuation of its liabilities for a particular class of business using its stochastic model. It has decided to review the accuracy of the results using actual policy records.*

*The company has already checked the accuracy of the data, assumptions and formulae to be used.*

### 8-ii

*Discuss the reasons why the insurance company has used a stochastic model rather than a deterministic model. [8]*

[Modelling](17-modelling.md#deterministic-vs-stochastic)

#### Operation of a stochastic model

The stochastic model can mimic closely the key characteristics of the liabilities, eg if they vary with inflation.

The stochastic model can allow for uncertainty in the key risks.

The stochastic model produces a distribution of results, therefore giving more insight into the business ...

... and can help the insurer understand the impact of extreme events.

The stochastic model can aid understanding of tail risk.

A stochastic model enables better modelling of correlations ...

... eg how withdrawal rates on the class of business vary with investment returns.

The stochastic model can easily allow for variations in:

- asset values
- claims experience.

The stochastic model can help management decide on the implications of certain decisions ...

... eg the impact of mismatching assets and liabilities.

The insurer may have the expertise to produce and run a stochastic model.

#### The class of business

There may be factors impacting the liabilities that are difficult to model deterministically ...

... eg a stochastic model is useful if the business being modelled has guarantees or options.

If the business is highly sensitive to economic factors ...

... then a stochastic model will be helpful if market conditions are volatile.

Stochastic modelling can be helpful in modelling the impact of management actions, eg increased underwriting.

Stochastic modelling is useful where the liabilities vary in a non-linear way.

#### The purpose of the exercise

Regulation may require that a stochastic model is used for the particular modelling exercise.

The exercise may require a high level of accuracy and this outweighs the need to produce the result quickly.

### 8-iii

*Set out the remaining steps that could be taken to review the accuracy of the model’s calculated result. [4]*

#### Checks on the model

The mean value and a range of other points from the distribution of results should be checked ...

... eg against an independent deterministic model.

The results can be reconciled with those from last time.

Checks need to be carried out as to whether the output of the stochastic model agrees with the formulae.

A goodness-of-fit test can be carried out against actual experience.

Sensitivity testing can be carried out.

A detailed analysis can be carried out changing each assumption in turn ...

... and checking the results are reasonable.

#### Independent verification

The model can be peer reviewed.

Consultants can be asked to review the model and its documentation.

An approximate back of the envelope calculation can be carried out to check the results are reasonable.

In carrying out the assessment, need to consider the degree of accuracy required ...

... which is likely to reflect how significant the line of business is ...

... noting that it can be difficult to get similar models to produce the same results.

## 9

*A number of countries are members of a union where member countries can access each other’s markets. In return, member countries follow a consistent set of regulations governing, among other things, financial services.*

*Country F, a developed country that has been a member of the Union for many years, has recently decided to leave the Union. The government of Country F is proposing a full review of its regulations, including for financial services.*

### 9-i

*Outline the principal aims of regulation of financial markets. [2]*

[Aims of regulation](03-regulation.md#aims-of-regulation)

- Give confidence in the financial system
- Reduce financial crime
- Inefficiencies corrected
- Protect consumers of financial products

---

- correct perceived market inefficiencies and promote efficient and orderly markets
- protect consumers of financial products
- maintain confidence in the financial system
- help reduce financial crime

### 9-ii

*Describe possible regulatory regimes the government of Country F could consider implementing. [3]*

[Regulatory regimes](03-regulation.md#regulatory-regimes)

Unregulated markets – where there are no regulations imposed.

Self-regulation – where regulation and compliance are operated by the market participants.

Statutory regulation – where the government or regulator sets down the rules to be followed.

### 9-iii

*Suggest an advantage and a disadvantage of each of the regimes identified in part (ii). [3]*

[Regulatory regimes](03-regulation.md#regulatory-regimes)

### 9-iv

*Outline the potential risks to the domestic financial services industry that Country F faces as a result of changing its regulatory regime now. [4]*

#### Risks of changing regulation

There will be costs of changing regulation.

Both the companies in the industry and the regulator may not have the resources to make the changes in the intended timescales.

In Country F there may be one or two large financial providers who may dominate ...

... and these companies may take up a large amount of the regulator's time.

It may be more difficult to avoid monopolies and anti-competitive practices.

The uncertainty over the new regulation may lead to volatility on the financial and currency markets.

Some companies may be unwilling to invest until the regulations have been clarified.

It may be sensible to include a transition period to phase in the new regulations.

#### Risks of leaving the union

There is a risk that some businesses decide to relocate to countries that are still in the Union.

There may be a loss of access to customers or companies still in the Union.

There may be a loss of confidence amongst consumers as the new regulation may create uncertainty.

Country F may no longer be able to trade on preferential terms with countries in the Union.

There may be increased costs of business transactions.

There may be a less competition in Country F if its citizens can no longer buy products from countries in the Union ...

... leading to less innovation and higher prices.

There may be upside risk if there is a lower level of regulation than imposed on countries in the Union.

### 9-v

*Discuss why the countries remaining in the Union might be concerned about any changes to Country F's regulatory regime. [4]*

#### Competitiveness of countries in the union

Companies in Country F may be able to offer lower prices than the Union if they are subject to less regulation.

This may make it difficult for countries in the Union to compete.

#### Impact on citizens of countries in the union

Citizens of countries in the Union may have purchased products from Country F, and their benefits may be less secure ...

... if Country F has more lax regulation.

The governments of Union countries may need to compensate citizens if the products purchased fail.

#### Companies who carry out business with country F

It may be more difficult for companies based in the Union to supply consumers in Country F.

### 9-vi

*Suggest how the countries in the Union might seek to mitigate any risks in relation to (iv) and (v). [4]*

#### Harmonising regulation

The Union may wish to negotiate with Country F to harmonise the regulations in key areas.

#### Transition period

It may be that only areas that both parties agree should be changed will be altered on day one of the new arrangement.

There may be an agreement to phase in any wider-ranging changes over a number of years.

#### Trade between country F and the countries in the Union

Restrictions can be imposed on Country F trading with the Union.

#### Differences in regulation

Countries in the Union may consider amending their regulation to enable companies to compete with those in Country F.
